----------
Thus have I heard. The Blessed One once stayed in the Castle of Laṅkā which is situated on the peak of Mount Malaya on the great ocean, and which is adorned with flowers made of jewels of various kinds.1 He was with a large assembly of Bhikshus and with a great multitude of Bodhisattvas, who had come together from various Buddha-lands. The Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas, headed by the Bodhisattva Mahāmati, were all perfect masters2 of the various Samādhis, the [tenfold] self-mastery, the [ten] powers, and the [six] psychic faculties; they were anointed by the hands of all the Buddhas; they all well understood the significance of the objective world as the manifestation of their own Mind; (2) they knew how to maintain [various] forms, teachings, and disciplinary measures, according to the various mentalities and behaviours of beings; they were thoroughly versed in the five Dharmas, the [three] Svabhāvas, the [eight] Vijñānas, and the twofold Non-ātman.
At that time, the Blessed One who had been preaching in the palace of the King of Sea-serpents came out at the expiration of seven days and was greeted by an innumerable host of Nāgakanyās including Śakra and Brahma, and looking at Laṅkā on Mount Malaya smiled and said, “By the Tathāgatas of the past, who were Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones, this Truth was made the subject of their discourse, at that castle of Laṅkā on the mountain-peak of Malaya, —the Truth realisable by noble wisdom in one's inmost self, which is beyond the reasoning knowledge of the philosophers as well as the state of consciousness of the Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas.3 I, too, would now for the sake of Rāvaṇa, Overlord of the Yakshas, discourse on this Truth.”
[Inspired] by the spiritual power of the Tathāgata, Rāvaṇa, Lord of the Rākshasas, heard [his voice]. Indeed, the Blessed One, surrounded and accompanied by an in-numerable host of Nāgakanyās including Śakra and Brahma, came out of the palace of the King of Sea-serpents; and looking at the waves of the ocean and also at the mental agitations going on in those assembled, [he thought of] the ocean of the Ālayavijñāna where the evolving Vijñānas [like the waves] are stirred by the wind of objectivity. While he was standing there [thus absorbed in contemplation, Rāvaṇa saw him and] uttered a joyous cry, saying: “I will go and request of the Blessed One to enter into Laṅkā; for this long night he would probably profit, do good, and gladden (3) the gods as well as human beings.”
Thereupon, Rāvaṇa, Lord of the Rākshasas, with his attendants, riding in his floral celestial chariot, came up where the Blessed One was, and having arrived there he and his attendants came out of the chariot. Walking around the Blessed One three times from left to right, they played on a musical instrument, beating it with a stick of blue Indra (saphire), and hanging the lute at one side, which was inlaid with the choicest lapis lazuli and supported by [a ribbon of] priceless cloth, yellowish-white like Priyangu, they sang with various notes such as Saharshya, Rishabha, Gāndhāra, Dhaivata, Nishāda. Madyama, and Kaiśika,4 which were melodiously modulated in Grāma, Mūrchana, etc.; the voice in accompaniment with the flute beautifully blended with the measure of the Gāthā.
1. “The truth-treasure whose principle is the self-nature of Mind, has no selfhood (nairātmyam), stands above all reasoning, and is free from impurities; it points to the knowledge attained in one's inmost self; Lord, show me here the way leading to the Truth.
2. “The Sugata is the body in whom are stored immaculate virtues; in him are manifested [bodies] trans-forming and transformed; he enjoys the Truth realised in his inmost self; may he visit Laṅkā. Now is the time, Muni!
3. (4) “This Laṅkā was inhabited by the Buddhas of the past, and [they were] accompanied by their sons who were owners of many forms. Lord, show me now the highest Truth, and the Yakshas who are endowed with many forms will listen.”
Thereupon, Rāvaṇa, the Lord of Laṅkā, further adapting the Totaka rhythm sang this in the measure of the Gāthā.
4. After seven nights, the Blessed One leaving the ocean which is the abode of the Makara, the palace of the sea-king, now stands on the shore.
5. Just as the Buddha rises, Rāvaṇa, accompanied by the Apsaras and Yakshas numerous, by Suka, Sarana, and learned men,
6. Miraculously goes over to the place where the Lord is standing. Alighting from the floral vehicle, he greets the Tathāgata reverentially, makes him offerings, tells him who he is, and stands by the Lord.
7. “I who have come here, am called Rāvaṇa, the ten-headed king of the Rākshasas, mayest thou graciously receive me with Laṅkā and all its residents.
8. “In this city, the inmost state of consciousness realised, indeed, by the Enlightened Ones of the past (5) was disclosed on this peak studded with precious stones.
9. “Let the Blessed One, too. surrounded by sons of the Victorious One, now disclose the Truth immaculate on this peak embellished with precious stones; we, together with the residents of Laṅkā, desire to listen.
10. “The Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra which is praised by the Buddhas of the past [discloses] the inmost state of consciousness realised by them, which is not founded on any system of doctrine.
11. “I recollect the Buddhas of the past surrounded by sons of the Victorious One recite this sūtra; the Blessed One, too, will speak.
12. “In the time to come, there will be Buddhas and Buddha-Sons pitying the Yakshas; the Leaders will discourse on this magnificent doctrine on the peak adorned with precious stones.
13. “This magnificent city of Laṅkā is adorned with varieties of precious stones, [surrounded] by peaks, refreshing and beautiful and canopied by a net of jewels.
14. “Blessed One, here are the Yakshas who are free from faults of greed, reflecting on [the Truth] realised in one's inmost self and making offerings to the Buddhas of the past; they are believers in the teaching of the Mahāyāna and intent on disciplining one another.
15. “There are younger Yakshas, girls and boys, desiring to know the Mahāyāna. Come, Blessed One, who art our Teacher, come to Laṅkā on Mount Malaya.
16. (6) “The Rākshasas, with Kumbhakarṇa at their head, who are residing in the city, wish, as they are devoted to the Mahāyāna, to hear about this inmost realisation.
17. “They have made offerings assiduously to the Buddhas [in the past] and are to-day going to do the same. Come, for compassion's sake, to the Laṅkā, together with [thy] sons.
18. “Mahāmati, accept my mansion, the company of the Apsaras, necklaces of various sorts, and the delightful Aśoka garden.
19. “I give myself up to serve the Buddhas and their sons; there is nothing with me that I do not give up [for their sake]; Great Muni, have compassion on me!”
20. Hearing him speak thus, the Lord of the Triple World said, “King of Yakshas, this mountain of precious stones was visited by the Leaders in the past.
21. “And, taking pity on you, they discoursed on the Truth revealed in their inmost [consciousness]. [The Buddhas of] the future time will proclaim [the same] on this jewel-adorned mountain.
22. “This [inmost Truth] is the abode of those Yogins who stand in the presence of the Truth. King of the Yakshas, you have the compassion of the Sugatas and myself.”
23. The Blessed One accepting the request [of the King] remained silent and undisturbed; he now mounted the floral chariot offered by Rāvaṇa.
24. Thus Rāvaṇa and others, wise sons of the Victorious One, (7) honoured by the Apsaras singing and dancing, reached the city.
25. Arriving in the delightful city [the Buddha was] again the recipient of honours; he was honoured by the group of Yakshas including Rāvaṇa and by the Yaksha women.
26. A net of jewels was offered to the Buddha by the younger Yakshas, girls and boys, and necklaces beautifully ornamented with jewels were placed by Rāvaṇa about the neck of the Buddha and those of the sons of the Buddha.5
27. The Buddhas together with the sons of the Buddha and the wise men, accepting the offerings, discoursed on the Truth which is the state of consciousness realised in the inmost self.
28. Honouring [him as] the best speaker, Rāvaṇa and the company of the Yakshas honoured Mahāmati and requested of him again and again:6
29. “Thou art the asker of the Buddha concerning the state of consciousness realised in their inmost selves, of which we here, Yakshas as well as the sons of the Buddha, are desirous of hearing. I, together with the Yakshas, the sons of the Buddha, and the wise men, request this of thee.
30. “Thou art the most eloquent of speakers, and the most strenuous of the Yogins; with faith I beg of thee. Ask [the Buddha] about the doctrine, O thou the proficient one!
31. “Free from the faults of the philosophers and Pratyekabuddhas and Śrāvakas is (8) the Truth of the inmost consciousness, immaculate and culminating in the stage of Buddhahood.”
32.7 Thereupon the Blessed One created jewel-adorned mountains and other objects magnificently embellished with jewels in an immense number.
33. On the summit of each mountain the Buddha himself was visible, and Rāvaṇa, the Yaksha, also was found standing there.
34. Thus the entire assembly was seen on each mountain-peak, and all the countries Were there, and in each there was a Leader.
35. Here also was the King of the Rākshasas and the residents of Laṅkā, and the Laṅkā created by the Buddha rivaling [the real one].
36. Other things were there, too, —the Aśoka with its shining woods, and on each mountain-peak Mahāmati was making a request of the Buddha,
37. Who discoursed for the sake of the Yakshas on the Truth leading to the inmost realisation; on the mountain-peak he delivered a complete sūtra with an exquisite voice varied in hundreds of thousands of ways.8
38. [After this] the teacher and the sons of the Buddha vanished away in the air, leaving Rāvaṇa the Yaksha himself standing [above] in his mansion.
39. Thought he, “How is this? What means this? and by whom was it heard? What was it that was seen? and by whom was it seen? Where is the city? and where is the Buddha?
40. “Where are those countries, those jewel-shining Buddhas, those Sugatas? (9) Is it a dream then? or a vision? or is it a castle conjured up by the Gandharvas?
41. “Or is it dust in the eye, or a fata morgana, or the dream-child of a barren woman, or the smoke of a fire-wheel, that which I saw here?”
42. Then [Rāvaṇa reflected], “This is the nature as it is (Dharmatā) of all things, which belongs to the realm of Mind, and it is not comprehended by the ignorant as they are confused by every form of imagination.
43. “There is neither the seer nor the seen, neither the speaker nor the spoken; the form and usage of the Buddha and his Dharma—they are nothing but discrimination.
44. “Those who see things such as were seen before, do not see the Buddha; [even] when discrimination is not aroused, one does not see9 the Buddha; the Buddha being fully-enlightened is seen where the world itself is not evolved.
The Lord of Laṅkā was then immediately awakened [from his reflection], feeling a revulsion (parāvṛtti) in his mind and realising that the world was nothing but his own mind: he was settled in the realm of non-discrimination, was urged by the stock of his past good deeds, acquired the cleverness of understanding all the texts, obtained the faculty of seeing things as they are, was no more dependent upon others, observed things excellently with his own wisdom (buddhi), gained the insight that was not of discursive reasoning, was no more dependent upon others,10 became a great Yogin of the discipline, was able to manifest himself in all excellent forms, got thoroughly acquainted with all skilful means, had the knowledge of the characteristic aspects of every stage, by which he would surmount it skilfully, was delighted to look into11 the self-nature of Citta, Manas, Manovijñāna, got a view whereby he could cut himself loose from the triple continuation, had the knowledge of disposing of every argument of (10) the philosophers on causation, thoroughly understood the Tathāgata-garbha, the stage of Buddhahood, the inmost self, found himself abiding in the Buddha-knowledge; [when suddenly] a voice was heard from the sky, saying, “It is to be known by oneself.”“Well done, well done, Lord of Laṅkā! Well done, indeed, Lord of Laṅkā, for once more! The Yogin is to discipline himself as thou doest. The Tathāgatas and all things are to be viewed as they are viewed by thee; otherwise viewed, it is nihilism.All things are to be comprehended by transcending the Citta, Manas, and Vijñāna as is done by thee. Thou shouldst look inwardly and not become attached to the letter and a superficial view of things;thou shouldst not fall into the attainments, conceptions, experiences, views, and Samādhis of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; thou shouldst not have any liking for small talk and witticism;thou shouldst not cherish the notion of self-substance,12 nor have any thought for the vainglory of rulership, nor dwell on such Dhyānas as belong to the six Dhyānas, etc. “Lord of Laṅkā, this is the realisation of the great Yogins: to destroy the discourses advanced by others, to crush mischievous views in pieces, to keep themselves properly away from ego-centered notions, to cause a revulsion in the depths of the mind fittingly by means of an exquisite knowledge. Such are sons of the Buddha who walk in the way of the Mahāyāna. In order to enter upon the stage of self-realisation as attained by the Tathāgatas, the discipline is to be pursued by thee.“Lord of Laṅkā, conducting thyself in this manner, let thee be further purified in the way thou hast attained; (11) by disciplining thyself well in Samādhi and Samāpatti, follow not the state realised and enjoyed by the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, which rises from the imagination of those who discipline themselves according to the practices of the puerile philosophers. They cling to the individual forms of the world created by their egotistical ideas; they maintain such notions as element, quality, and substance; they cling tenaciously to views originating from ignorance; they become confused by cherishing the idea of birth where prevails emptiness; they cling to discrimination [as real]; they fall into the way of thinking where obtains [the dualism of] qualifying and qualified.“Lord of Laṅkā, this is what leads to various excellent attainments, this is what makes one grow aware of the inmost attainment, this is the Mahāyāna realisation. This will result in the acquirement of an excellent condition of existence. “Lord of Laṅkā, by entering upon the Mahāyāna discipline the veils [of ignorance] are destroyed, and one turns away from the multitudinous waves of the Vijñāna and falls not into the refuge and practice of the philosophers.“Lord of Laṅkā, the philosophers' practice starts from their own egotistic attachments. Their ugly practice arises from adhering to dualistic views concerning the self-nature of the Vijñāna. “Well done, Lord of Laṅkā; reflect on the signification of this as you did when seeing the Tathāgata before; for this, indeed, is seeing the Tathāgata.”
At that time it occurred to Rāvaṇa: “I wish to see the Blessed One again, who has all the disciplinary practices at his command, who has turned away from the practices of the philosophers, who is born of the state of realisation in the inmost consciousness, and who is beyond [the dualism of] the transformed and the transforming. He is the knowledge (12) realised by the Yogins, he is the realisation attained by those who enjoy the perfect bliss of the Samādhi which they gain by coming to an intuitive understanding through meditation.May I see thus [again] the Compassionate One by means of his miraculous powers in whom the fuel of passion and discrimination is destroyed, who is surrounded by sons of the Buddha, who has penetrated into the minds and thoughts of all beings, who moves about everywhere, who knows everything, who keeps himself away from work (kriyā) and form (lakṣana); seeing him may I attain what I have not yet attained, [retain] what I have already gained, may I conduct myself with non-discrimination, abide in the joy of Samādhi and Samāpatti, and attain the ground where the Tathāgatas walk, and in these make progress.”
At that moment, the Blessed One recognising that the Lord of Laṅkā is to attain the Anutpattikadharmakshanti showed his glorious compassion for the ten-headed one by making himself visible once more on the mountain-peak studded with many jewels and enveloped in a net-work of jewels.The ten-headed King of Laṅkā saw the splendour again as seen before on the mountain-peak, [he saw] the Tathāgata, who was the Arhat and the Fully-Enlightened One, with the thirty-two marks of excellence beautifully adorning his person, and also saw himself on each mountain-peak, together with Mahāmati, in front of the Tathāgata, the Fully-Enlightened One, putting forward his discourse on the realisation experienced by the Tathāgata in his inmost self, and, surrounded by the Yakshas, conversing on the verbal teachings and stories [of the Buddha]. Those (13) [Buddha]-lands were seen with the Leaders.13
Then the Blessed One beholding again this great assembly with his wisdom-eye, which is not the human eye, laughed loudly and most vigorously like the lion-king. Emitting rays of light from the tuft of hair between the eyebrows, from the ribs, from the loins, from the Srivatsa14 on the breast, and from every pore of the skin, — emitting rays of light which shone flaming like the fire taking place at the end of a kalpa, like a luminous rainbow, like the rising sun, blazing brilliantly, gloriously—which were observed from the sky by Śakra, Brahma, and the guardians of the world, the one who sat on the peak [of Laṅkā] vying with Mount Sumeru laughed the loudest laugh.At that time the assembly of the Bodhisattvas together with Śakra and Brahma, each thought within himself: “For what reason, I wonder, from what cause does the Blessed One who is the master of all the world (sarva-dharma-vaśavartin), after smiling first,15 laugh the loudest laugh? Why does he emit rays of light from his own body? Why, emitting [rays of light], does he remain silent, with the realisation [of the Truth] in his inmost self, and absorbed deeply and showing no surprise in the bliss of Samādhi, and reviewing the [ten] quarters, looking around like the lion-king, and thinking only of the discipline, attainment, and performance of Rāvaṇa?”
At that time, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva who was previously requested by Rāvaṇa [to ask the Buddha concerning his self-realisation], feeling pity on him, (14) and knowing the minds and thoughts of the assembly of the Bodhisattvas, and observing that beings to be born in the future would be confused in their minds because of their delight in the verbal teaching (desanapatha), because of their clinging to the letter as [fully in accordance with] the spirit (artha), because of their clinging to the disciplinary powers of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, —which might lead them to think how it were that the Tathāgatas, the Blessed Ones, even in their transcendental state of consciousness should burst out into loudest laughter—Mahāmati the Bodhisattva asked the Buddha in order to put a stop to their inquisitiveness the following question: “For what reason, for what cause did this laughter take place?”Said the Blessed One: “Well done, well done, Mahāmati! Well done, indeed, for once more, Mahāmati! Viewing the world as it is in itself and wishing to enlighten the people in the world who are fallen into a wrong view of things in the past, present, and future, thou undertakest to ask me the question.Thus should it be with the wise men who want to ask questions for both themselves and others. Rāvaṇa, Lord of Laṅkā, O Mahāmati, asked a twofold question of the Tathāgatas of the past who are Arhats and perfect Buddhas;and he wishes now to ask me too a twofold question in order to have its distinction, attainment, and scope ascertained—this is what is never tasted by those who practise the meditation of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; and the same will be asked by the question-loving ten-headed one of the Buddhas to come.”
Knowing that, the Blessed One said to the Lord of Laṅkā, thus: “Ask, thou Lord of Laṅkā; the Tathāgata has given thee permission [to ask], delay not, whatever questions thou desirest to have answered, I will answer each of them (15) with judgment to the satisfaction of your heart.Keeping thy seat of thought free from [false] discrimination, observe well what is to be subdued at each stage; ponder things with wisdom; [seeing into] the nature of the inner principle in thyself, abide in the bliss of Samādhi; embraced by the Buddhas in Samādhi, abide in the bliss of tranquillisation; going beyond the Samādhi and understanding attained by the Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas, abide in [the attainment of the Bodhisattvas] in the stages of Acala, Sadhumati, and Dharmamegha; grasp well the egolessness of all things in its true significance; be anointed by the Buddhas in Samādhi at the great palace of lotus-jewels.16Surrounded by the Bodhisattvas who are sitting on lotuses of various sorts each supported by the gracious power of the Buddhas, thou shalt find thyself sitting on a lotus and each one of the Bodhisattvas looking at thee face to face. This is a realm beyond the imagination.Thou shouldst plan out an adequate plan and establish thyself at a stage of discipline by planning out such a plan as shall include [all kinds of] skilful means, so that thou comest to realise that realm which is beyond imagination; and thou shouldst attain the stage of Tathāgatahood in which one is able to manifest oneself in various forms, and which is something never seen before by the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, philosophers, Brahma, Indra, Upendra, and others.”
At that moment the Lord of Laṅkā being permitted by the Blessed One, rose from his seat on the peak of the jewel-mountain which shone like the jewel-lotus immaculate and shining in splendour; he was surrounded by a large company of celestial maidens, and all kinds of garlands, flowers, perfumes, incense, unguents, umbrellas, banners, fiags, necklaces, half-necklaces, diadems, tiaras, (16) and other ornaments whose splendour and excellence were never heard of or seen before, were created; music was played surpassing anything that could be had by the gods, Nagas, Yakshas, Rākshasas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Mahoragas, and men; musical instruments were created equal to anything that could be had in all the world of desire and also such superior musical instruments were created as were to be seen in the Buddha-lands; the Blessed One and the Bodhisattvas were enveloped in a net of jewels; a variety of dresses and high banners was made rising high in the air as high as seven tala trees to great [the Buddha], showering great clouds of offerings, playing music which resounded [all around], and then descending from the air, [the Lord of Laṅkā] sat down on the peak of the jewel-mountain ornamented with magnificent jewel-lotus whose splendour was second only to the sun and lightning.Sitting he made courtesy smiling first to the Blessed One for his permission and proposed him a twofold question: “It was asked of the Tathāgatas of the past, who were Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, and it was solved by them. Blessed One, now I ask of thee;[the request] will certainly be complied with by thee as far as verbal instruction is concerned17 as it was by the Buddhas [of the past]. Blessed One, duality was discoursed upon by the Transformed Tathāgatas and Tathāgatas of Trans-formation, but not by the Tathāgatas of Silence.18The Tathāgatas of Silence are absorbed in the blissful state of Samādhi, they do not discriminate concerning this state, nor do they discourse on it. Blessed One, thou assuredly wilt discourse on this subject of duality. Thou art thyself a master of all things, an Arhat, a Tathāgata. The sons of the Buddha and myself are anxious to listen to it.”
The Blessed One said, “Lord of Laṅkā, tell me what you mean by duality?” The Lord of the Rākshasas, (17) who was renewed in his ornaments, full of splendour and beauty, with a diadem, bracelet, and necklace strung with vajra thread, said, “It is said that even dharmas are to be abandoned, and how much more adharmas. Blessed One, why does this dualism exist that we are called upon to abandon? What are adharmas? and what are dharmas? How can there be a duality of things to abandon—a duality that arises from falling into discrimination, from discriminating self-substance where there is none, from [the idea of] things created (bhautika) and uncreated, because the non-differentiating nature of the Ālayavijñāna is not recognised? Like the seeing of a hair-circle as really existing in the air, [the notion of dualism] belongs to the realm of intellection not exhaustively pur-gated. This being the. case as it should be, how could there be any abandonment [of dharmas and adharmas]?”
Said the Blessed One, “Lord of Laṅkā, seest thou not that the differentiation of things, such as is perceived in jars and other breakable objects whose nature it is to perish in time, takes place in a realm of discrimination [cherished by] the ignorant? This being so, is it not to be so understood?It is due to discrimination [cherished by] the ignorant that there exists the differentiation of dharma and adharma. Noble wisdom (āryajñāna), however, is not to be realised by seeing [things this way]. Lord of Laṅkā, let it be so with the ignorant who follow the particularised aspect of existence that there are such objects as jars, etc., but it is not so with the wise. One flame of uniform nature rises up depending on houses, mansions, parks, and terraces, and burns them down; while a difference in the flames is seen according to the power of each burning material which varies in length, magnitude, etc.This being so, why (18) is it not to be so understood? The duality of dharma and adharma thus comes into existence. Not only is there seen a fire-flame spreading out in one continuity and yet showing a variety of flames, but from one seed, Lord of Laṅkā, are produced, also in one continuity, stems, shoots, knots, leaves, petals, flowers, fruit, branches, all individualised.As it is with every external object from which grows [a variety of] objects, so also with internal objects. From ignorance there develop the Skandhas, Dhātus, Āyatanas, with all kinds of objects accompanying, which grow out in the triple world where we have, as we see, happiness, form, speech, and behaviour, each differentiating [infinitely]. The oneness of the Vijñāna is grasped variously according to the evolution of an objective world; thus there are seen things inferior, superior, and middling, things defiled and free from defilement, things good and bad.Not only, Lord of Laṅkā, is there such a difference of conditions in things generally, there is also seen a variety of realisations attained innerly by each Yogin as he treads the path of discipline which constitutes his practice. How much more difference in dharma and adharma do we not see in a world of particulars which is evolved by discrimination? Indeed, we do.
“Lord of Laṅkā, the differentiation of dharma and adharma comes from discrimination. Lord of Laṅkā, what are dharmas? That is, they are discriminated by the discriminations cherished by the philosophers, Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and ignorant people. They think that the dharmas headed by quality and substance are produced by causes—[these are the notions] to be abandoned.Such are not to be regarded [as real] because they are appearances (lakṣana). It comes from one's clinging [to appearances] that the manifestations of his own Mind are regarded as reality (Dharmatā). (19) Such things as jars, etc., are products of discrimination conceived by the ignorant, they exist not; their substances are not attainable. The viewing of things from this viewpoint is known as their abandonment.
“What, then, are adharmas? Lord of Laṅkā, [dharmas] are unattainable as to their selfhood, they are not appearances born of discrimination, they are above causality; there is in them no such [dualistic] happening as is seen as reality and non-reality. This is known as the abandoning of dharmas.What again is meant by the unattainability of dharmas? That is, it is like horns of a hare, or an ass, or a camel, or a horse, or a child conceived by a barren woman. They are dharmas the nature of which is unattainable; they are not to be thought [as real] because they are appearances. They are only talked about in popular parlance if they have any sense at all; they are not to be adhered to as in the case of jars, etc.As these [unrealities] are to be abandoned as not comprehensible by the mind (Vijñāna), so are things (bhava) of discrimination also to be abandoned.This is called the abandoning of dharmas and adharmas. Lord of Laṅkā, your question as to the way of abandoning dharmas and adharmas is hereby answered.
“Lord of Laṅkā, thou sayest again that thou hast asked [this question] of the Tathāgatas of the past who were Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones and that it was solved by them. Lord of Laṅkā, that which is spoken of as the past belongs to discrimination;as the past is thus a discriminated [idea], even so are the [ideas] of the future and the present. Because of reality (Dharmatā) the Tathāgatas do not discriminate, they go beyond discrimination and futile reasoning, they do not follow (20) the individuation-aspect of forms (rupa)except when [reality] is disclosed for the edification of the unknowing and for the sake of their happiness.19 It is by transcendental wisdom (prajna) that the Tathāgata performs deeds transcending forms (animittacara); therefore, what constitutes the Tathāgatas in essence as well as in body is wisdom (jñāna). They do not discriminate, nor are they discriminated.Wherefore do they not discriminate the Manas? Because discrimination is of the self, of soul, of personality.How do they not discriminate? The Manovijñāna is meant for the objective world where causality prevails as regards forms, appearances, conditions, and figures.Therefore, discrimination and non-discrimination must be transcended.
“Lord of Laṅkā, beings are appearances, they are like figures painted on the wall, they have no sensibility [or consciousness]. Lord of Laṅkā, all that is in the world is devoid of work and action because all things have no reality,and there is nothing heard, nothing hearing. Lord of Laṅkā, all that is in the world is like an image magically transformed. This is not comprehended by the philosophers and the ignorant.Lord of Laṅkā, he who thus sees things, is the one who sees truthfully. Those who see things otherwise walk in discrimination;as they depend on discrimination, they cling to dualism. It is like seeing one's own image reflected in a mirror, or one's own shadow in the water, or in the moonlight, or seeing one's shadow in the house, or hearing an echo in the valley.People grasping their own shadows of discrimination (21) uphold the discrimination of dharma and adharma and, failing to carry out the abandonment of the dualism, they go on discriminating and never attain tranquillity.By tranquillity is meant oneness (ekāgra), and oneness gives birth to the highest Samādhi, which is gained by entering into the womb of Tathāgatahood, which is the realm of noble wisdom realised in one's inmost self.”
The First Chapter Called “Rāvaṇa Asking for Instruction.”20
[CHAPTER TWO]
§I 1 (22) At that time Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva who had visited all the Buddha-lands, together with all the Bodhisattvas, rose from his seat by the power of the Buddhas, drawing his upper garment over one shoulder, placing his right knee on the ground and with folded hands, turning in the direction of the Blessed One, respectfully saluted him, and praised him with the following verses:
1. As thou reviewest the world with thy transcendental knowledge and compassion, it is to thee like an ethereal flower, of which one cannot say whether it is born or destroyed, as [the category of] being and non-being is inapplicable to it.
2. As thou reviewest all things with thy transcendental knowledge and compassion, they are to thee like visions, they are beyond the reach of intellectual grasp, as [the category of] being and non-being is inapplicable to them.
3. As thou reviewest the world with thy transcendental knowledge and compassion, it is to thee always like a dream, of which one cannot say whether it is permanent or destructible, as [the category of] being and non-being is inapplicable to it.
4. In the Dharmakaya, whose self-nature is like a vision or a dream, what is there to praise? When no thought arises as to existence or as to not-having-self-nature, then there is praise.
5. Of a thing whose appearance is not visible because of its being beyond the senses and their objects (23), how can it be praised or blamed, O Muni?
6. With thy transcendental knowledge and compassion which are above form, thou comprehendest the egolessness of things and persons, and art thyself always clean and free from the hindrances of passion and knowledge.
7. Thou dost not vanish in Nirvāṇa, nor is Nirvāṇa abiding in thee; for it transcends the duality of knowing and known and of being and non-being.
8. Those who see the Muni so serene and beyond birth [and death] will be cleansed of attachment, stainless both in this world and in the other.
§II At that time Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva praising the Blessed One with such verses as these, made his own name known to the Blessed One.
9. I am Mahāmati, Blessed One, and am well versed in the Mahāyāna. I wish to ask one hundred and eight questions of thee who art most eloquent.
10. Hearing his words the Buddha, the best knower of the world, looking over the whole assembly, spoke to the son of the Sugata thus:
11. Ask me, sons of the Victorious, and Mahāmati, you ask and I will instruct you in self-realisation.
At that moment Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva who was given by the Blessed One the opportunity to speak, prostrated himself at the feet of the Blessed One and asked:
(24) 12. How can one be cleansed of false intellection? Whence does it arise? How can one perceive errors? Whence do they arise?
13. Whence come lands, transformation, appearance, and philosophers? Wherefore is the state of imagelessness, the gradations, and whence are the sons of the Victorious?
14. Where is the way of emancipation? Who is in bondage? By what is he redeemed? What is the mental state of those who practise the Dhyānas? Whence is the triple vehicle?
15. What is that which is born of causation? What is effect? What is cause [or that which works]? Whence the doctrine of duality? Whence does it arise?
16. Wherefore is the tranquilising exercise of formlessness? And that of complete extinction? Wherefore the extinction of thoughts? And how is one awakened from it?
17. How does action rise? Whence is the behaviour of those who hold the body? Whence [this] visible [world]? Whence the conditions? Whence the entrance upon the stages?
18. Who is it that breaks through this triple existence? What is the abode? What is the body? Where does that which is abiding arise? Whence comes the son of the Buddha?
19. Who attains the psychic faculties, the self-masteries, the Samādhis? How is the mind tranquilised? Pray tell me, O Bull-like Victor?
20. What is the Ālaya? And whence the Manovijñāna? (25) How does the visible [world] rise? How does it cease from being visible?
21. Whence are families and no-families? What is meant by Mind-only? The setting up of marks? And whence [the doctrine of] egolessness?
22. Why is there no being? What kind of teaching is in accordance with popular thinking? How can one cease cherishing eternalism (śāsvata-darśana) and nihilism (uccheda-darśana)?
23. How is it that you do not differ from the philosophers as regards appearance? Tell me, whence is the rise of the Nyaya school? Its future?
24. What is meant by emptiness? What do you understand by momentary destruction? Whence is the Womb? And whence is the stability of the world?
25. Why is the world like a vision and a dream? How does it resemble the city of the Gandharvas? Why it is to be regarded as like a mirage, or like the moon reflected in water? Pray tell me.
26. What are the elements of enlightenment? Whence are the constituents of enlightenment? Wherefore is a revolution, and the disturbance of a kingdom? And how does the realistic view of existence (bhavadṛṣṭi) take its rise?
27. What is meant by the world being above birth and death? or being like the flower in the air? How do you understand it? Why do you regard it as being beyond words?
28. How is it not subject to discrimination? How is it like the sky? Of how many sorts is suchness? How manifold is the Mind? How many Paramitas are there?
29. Whence is the gradation of the stages? What is the state of imagelessness? (26) Wherefore is the twofold egolessness? How is one cleansed of [the hindrance of] knowledge?
30. Of how many kinds is knowledge (jñāna)? O Leader! How many moral precepts are there? and forms of being? Whence are the families born of gold and jewel and pearl?
31. Of whom is speech born? Whence is the differentiation of beings? Whence are the sciences, offices, arts? and by whom are they made manifest?
32. Of how many sorts are Gāthās? What is prose? What is metre? Of how many sorts is reasoning and exegesis?
33. How many varieties of food and drink are there? Whence does sexual desire originate? Whence are there kings, sovereigns, and provincial rulers?
34. How does a king protect his dominion? Of how many groups are heavenly beings? Whence are the earth, stars, constellations, the moon, and the sun?
35. How many kinds of emancipation are there? of the Yogins? How many kinds of discipleship? And how about the masters?
36. How many kinds of Buddhahood are there? And how many of the Jataka Tales? How numerous are the evil ones? How numerous are the heretics?
37. What is meant by [the doctrine] that there is nothing but thought-construction? Pray tell me, thou Most Eloquent One?
(27) 38. Whence are the clouds in the sky? the wind? What is meant by recollection? by wisdom (medha)? Whence are trees and vines? Pray tell me, Lord of the Triple World?
39. How do horses, elephants, and deer get caught? Wherefore are there fools and despicable people? Pray tell me, thou Charioteer of the Mind?
40. Wherefore are the six seasons mentioned? What is meant by the Icchantika [one who is without Buddha-nature]? Pray tell me whence is the birth of a man? of a woman? of a hermaphrodite?
41. How does one retrograde in the Yoga exercises? How does one make progress in them? How many exercises are there? and how are men kept abiding in them? Pray tell me.
42. Beings are born in the various paths of existence, what are their specific marks and forms? How is abundance of wealth acquired? Pray tell me, thou who art like the sky?
43. Whence is the Sakya family? And the one born of Ikshvaku? Whence is the Rishi Long-Penance? What is taught by him?
44. How is it that thou art thus apparent everywhere in every land, surrounded by such Bodhisattvas of such various names and forms?
45. Why is meat not to be eaten? Why is it forbidden? Whence was the carnivorous race born, who eats meat?
46. Why are the lands shaped like the moon, the sun, the Sumeru, the lotus, the swatika, and the lion? Pray tell me.
(28) 47. Wherefore are the lands shaped like a capsized and upturned net of Indra which is composed of all sorts of jewels? Pray tell me why?
48. Wherefore are [the lands] shaped in the form of a lute or a drum? Like various flowers and fruits? Like the sun and the moon which are so stainless? Pray tell me.
49. Whence are the Buddhas of Transformation? Whence are the Buddhas of Maturity [or Recompense]? Whence are the Buddhas who are endowed with transcendental knowledge of suchness? Pray tell me.
50. Why does not one attain enlightenment in the world of desire? Pray tell me. What is the meaning of your being enlightened in the Akaniṣṭha by shaking off all the passions?
51. After my passing who will be the upholder of the Discipline [or Doctrine, sasana]! How long should the teacher abide? How long should the teaching continue?
52. How many sorts of established truths are there? And how many of philosophical views? Whence is morality? And what constitutes the being of a Bhikshu? Pray tell me.
53. What is meant by a state of revulsion [or turning-back]? Whence is a state of imagelessness, [which is realised] by the Pratyekabuddhas, Bodhisattvas, and Śrāvakas?
54. By whom are the psychic powers of this world attained? What are the super-worldly ones? By what means does the mind enter upon the seven stages? Pray tell me.
55. How many kinds of Brotherhood are there? And how does a dissension take place in a Brotherhood! Whence are medical treatises for beings? Pray tell me.
(29) 56. You say that you were among the Buddhas Kasyapa, Krakuchanda, and Kanakamuni; tell me wherefore so, O Great Muni!
57. Whence is the doctrine that there is no ego-soul in beings? Whence is the doctrine of eternity, and of annihilation? Wherefore do you not everywhere announce the doctrine of Mind-only as the truth?
58. What is meant by the forest of men and women? And by the forest of Karitaki and Amali? Whence are the mountains Kailasa, Cakravada, and Vajrasamhanana?
59. Among these, whence are the mountains decorated with various sorts of jewels and filled with Rishis and Gandharvas? Pray tell me.
60. Hearing this [which constitutes] the wonderful doctrine of the Mahāyāna and also the most excellent heart of the Buddhas, the Great Hero, the Buddha, the One Most Excelled in the Knowledge of the World, [spoke thus]:
61. Well done! Well done! O Mahaprajna-Mahāmati! Listen well, and I will tell you in order regarding your questions.
62. Birth, no-birth, Nirvāṇa, emptiness, transmigration, having-no-sell-nature, Buddhas, sons of the Paramitas,
63. The Śrāvakas, Bodhisattvas, the philosophers, those who are capable of formless deeds, the Meru, oceans, mountains, islands, lands, the earth,
64. The stars, the sun, the moon, the philosophers, the Asura, (30) emancipations, the self-masteries, the psychic faculties, the Dhyānas, the Samādhis,
65. The extinctions (nirodha), the supernatural powers, the elements of enlightenment, and the paths, Dhyānas, the unmeasurables, the aggregates (skandhas), and the comings-and-goings.
66. Samāpattis, the extinctions, the stirrings of mind, explanations in words, the Citta, Manas, and Vijñānas, egolessness, the five Dharmas,
67. Self-nature, the discriminating, the discriminated, the visible [world], dualism—whence are they? Various forms of vehicles, families, those born of gold, jewels, and pearls?
68. The Icchantika, the original elements, the wandering-about, one Buddhahood, knowledge, the known, the marching, the attainment, and the existence and non-existence of beings?
69. How are horses, elephants, deer caught? Pray tell me how. What is a proposition, a teaching established by the conjunction of reason and illustration?
70. Whence is cause and effect? Various errors? and also reason? [Why the statement that there is] nothing but Mind, that there is no objective [literally, seen] world, that there is no ascending of the stages?
71. Whence is the state of imagelessness and revulsion which is a hundredfold?1 You tell me. Likewise about medical treatises, arts, crafts, sciences, and teachings? 2
72. And also what are the measurements of the mountains, Sumeru, and the earth? What are the measurements of the ocean, moon, and sun? Tell me.
(31) 73. How many particles of dust are there in the body of a being? How many of the coarser ones, of the finer ones, and of the middle ones? How many particles of dust in every land? How many in every dhanva?
74. In measuring distance how much is a hasta, a dhanu, a krosa, a yojana, a half-yojana? How many of rabbit-hairs, of window-dust, louse-eggs, or ram-hairs, of barley?1
75. How many grains of barley in a prastha? How many grains of barley in a half-prastha? Likewise how many in a drona, in a khārya, a laksha, a koti, a vimvana?
76. How many atoms are there in a mustard-seed? How many mustard-seeds are there in a rakshika? How many in a bean, in a dharana, in a mashaka?
77. How many dharanas are there in a karsha? How many karshas in a pala? and how many palas are there in Mount Sumeru which is a huge accumulation [of masses]?
78. You should ask me thus, O son! Why do you ask me otherwise? How many atoms are there in the body of a Pratyekabuddha, of a Śrāvaka, of a Buddha, and of a Bodhisattva? (32) Why do you not ask me in this wise?
79. How many atoms are there at the top of a flame? How many atoms are in the wind? How many in each sense-organ? How many in a pore of the skin? in the eyebrows?
80. Whence are these men of immense wealth, kings, great sovereigns? How is the kingdom taken care of by them? And how about their emancipation?
81. Tell whence is prose and metre. Why is sexual desire universally cherished? Whence is the variety of foods and drinks? Whence the man-woman forest?
82. Wherefore are the mountains of Vajrasamhanana? Tell me whence, wherefore; are they like a vision, a dream, and a fata-morgana?3
83. Whence is the arising of clouds? And whence do the seasons rise? Whence is the nature of taste? Whence is woman, man, and hermaphrodite?
84. Whence are the adornments and the Bodhisattvas? Ask me, O my son! Whence are the divine mountains embellished by the Rishis and Gandharvas?
85. Whence is the way of emancipation? Who is in bondage? By whom is he delivered? What is the state of one who practises tranquillisation? What is transformation, and who are those philosophers?
86. What is meant by non-existence, existence, and no-effect? Whence arises the visible world? (33) How can one be cleansed of false intellection? Whence does false intellection arise?
87. Whence arises action? And whence its departure? Tell me. How does the extinction of thought take place? And what is meant by a Samādhi?
88. Who is the one that breaks through the triple world? What is the position? What is the body? Wherefore the doctrine that beings have no ego-soul? What is meant by a teaching in accordance with the world?1
89. Do you ask me about the marks? Do you ask me about egolessness? Do you ask me about the womb, about the Nyaya philosophers, O son of the Victor?
90. How about eternalism and nihilism? How is the mind tranquillised? Again [how about] speech, knowledge, morality, family, O son of the Victor?
91. What is meant by reasoning and illustrating, by master and disciple, by manifoldness of beings, food and drink, sky, intelligence, evil ones, and the statement that there is nothing but the thought-constructed?
92. What do you ask me concerning trees and vines, O son of the Victor? What about diversity of lands, and about Long-Penance the Rishi?4
93. What is your family? Who is your master? You tell me, O son of the Victor. Who are the people who are despised? How is it that in the Yoga you do not attain enlightenment in the world of desire, but that in the Akaniṣṭha there is realisation?
94. What do you ask me about reasoning? (34) What about the psychic faculties belonging to this world, and about the nature of a Bhikshu?
95. Do you ask me about Buddhas of Transformation, Buddhas of Maturity [or Recompense]? About Buddhas of the Knowledge of Suchness? And whence is the Bodhisattva?
96. You ask me, O son of the Victor, about the lands that are devoid of light, resembling a lute, a drum, and a flower, and about the mind abiding in the seven stages?
97. You ask me such and many other questions, which are in accordance with the marks [of Truth?] and free from erroneous views.
§III 98.5 I will instruct you as regards realisation and its teaching; listen to me intently; I will give you an explanation of the statements, O son, listen to me, in regard to the one hundred and eight statements as recounted by the Buddhas.
At that moment Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said to the Blessed One: What is meant by the one hundred and eight statements?6The Blessed One said: A statement concerning birth is no statement concerning birth; a statement concerning eternity is no statement concerning eternity. [The topics thus negated are as follows:7 ] the characteristic marks, abiding and changing, moment, self-nature, emptiness, annihilation, mind, the middle, permanence, causation, cause, the passions, desire, (35) means, contrivance, purity, inference [or conclusion], illustration, a disciple, a master, a family, the triple vehicle, imagelessness, vows, the triple circle, form, duality of being and non-being, bothness, the noble wisdom of self-realisation, the bliss of the present world, lands, atoms, water, a bow, reality, numbers and mathematics, the psychic powers, the sky, clouds, the arts and crafts and sciences, the wind, the earth, thinking, thought-constructions, self-nature, the aggregates, being, insight, Nirvāṇa, that which is known, the philosophers, disorder, a vision, a dream, (36) a mirage, a reflection, a circle made in the dark by a fire-brand, the city of the Gandharvas, the heavens, food and drink, sexuality, philosophical views, the Paramitas, morality, the moon and the sun and stars, truth, effect, annihilation and origination, medical treatment, the characteristic marks, the limbs, arts and sciences, Dhyāna, error, the seen [world], protection, dynasty, Rishi, kingdom, apprehension, treasure, explanation, the Icchantika, man, woman, and hermaphrodite, taste, action, the body, false intellection, motives, sense-organs, the Samskrita,8 cause and effect, the Kaniṣṭha,9 the seasons, a luxuriant growth of trees, vines and shrubs, (37) multiplicity, entering into the teaching, systems of morality, the Bhikshus, the powers added [by the Buddha], the lutes. These are the one hundred and eight statements recounted by the Buddhas of the past.
§IV At that moment, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said again to the Blessed One:In how many ways, Blessed One, does the rise, abiding, and ceasing of the Vijñānas take place?
The Blessed One replied: There are two ways, Mahāmati, in which the rise, abiding, and ceasing of the Vijñānas take place, and this is not understood by the philosophers.That is to say, the ceasing takes place as regards continuation and form.In the rise of the Vijñānas, also, these two are recognisable: the rise as regards continuation and the rise as regards form.In the abiding, also, these two [are discernible]: the one taking place as regards continuation and the other as regards form.[Further,] three modes are distinguishable in the Vijñānas: (1) the Vijñāna as evolving, (2) the Vijñāna as producing effects, and (3) the Vijñāna as remaining in its original nature.[Further,] Mahāmati, in the Vijñānas, which are said to be eight, two functions generally are distinguishable, the perceiving and the object-discriminating.As a mirror reflects forms, Mahāmati, the perceiving Vijñāna perceives [objects].Mahāmati, between the two, the perceiving Vijñāna and the object-discriminating Vijñāna, there is no difference; they are mutually conditioning.Then, Mahāmati, the perciving Vijñāna functions because of transformation's taking place [in the mind] by reason of a mysterious habit-energy, while, Mahāmati, the object-discriminating Vijñāna (38) functions because of the mind's discriminating an objective world and because of the habit-energy accumulated by erroneous reasoning since beginningless time.
Again, Mahāmati, by the cessation of all the sense-Vijñānas is meant the cessation of the Ālayavijñāna's variously accumulating habit-energy which is generated when unrealities are discriminated.This, Mahāmati, is known as the cessation of the form-aspect of the Vijñānas.Again, Mahāmati, the cessation of the continuation-aspect of the Vijñānas takes place in this wise:that is to say, Mahāmati, when both that which supports [the Vijñānas] and that which is comprehended [by the Vijñānas] cease to function.By that which supports [the Vijñānas] is meant the habit-energy [or memory] which has been accumulated by erroneous reasoning since beginningless time; and by that which is comprehended [by the Vijñānas] is meant the objective world perceived and discriminated by the Vijñānas, which is, however, no more than Mind itself.Mahāmati, it is like a lump of clay and the particles of dust making up its substance, they are neither different nor not-different; again, it is like gold and various ornaments made of it.If, Mahāmati, the lump of clay is different from its particles of dust, no lump will ever come out of them.But as it comes out of them it is not different from the particles of dust.Again, if there is no difference between the two, the lump will be indistinguishable from its particles.Even so, Mahāmati, if the evolving Vijñāna are different from the Ālayavijñāna, even in its original form, the Ālaya cannot be their cause.Again, if they are not different the cessation of the evolving Vijñānas will mean the cessation of the Ālayavijñāna, but there is no cessation of its original form.Therefore, Mahāmati, what ceases to function is not the Ālaya in its original self-form, but is the effect-producing form of the Vijñānas.When this original self-form ceases to exist, then there will indeed be the cessation of the Ālayavijñāna.(39) If, however, there is the cessation of the Ālayavijñāna, this doctrine will in no wise differ from the nihilistic doctrine of the philosophers.This doctrine, Mahāmati, as it is held by the philosophers, is this: When the grasping of an objective world ceases the continuation of the Vijñānas is stopped;and when there is no more of this continuation in the Vijñānas, the continuation that has been going on since beginningless time is also destroyed.Mahāmati, the philosophers maintain that there is a first cause from which continuation takes place;they do not maintain that the eye-Vijñāna arises from the interaction of form and light; they assume another cause.What is this cause, Mahāmati? Their first cause is known as spirit (pradhāna), soul (puruṣa), lord (īśvara), time, or atom.
V Again, Mahāmati, there are seven kinds of self-nature: collection (samudaya), being (bhava), characteristic marks (lakṣana), elements (mahābhūta), causality (hetu), conditionality (pratyaya), and perfection (niṣpatti).10
VI Again, Mahāmati, there are seven kinds of first principle [or highest reality, Paramārtha]: the world of thought (citta-gocara), the world of knowledge (jñāna-), the world of super-knowledge (prajñā-), the world of dualistic views (dṛṣṭi-), the world beyond dualistic views, the world beyond the Bodhisattva-stages, and a world where the Tathāgata attains his self-realisation.11
(40) Mahāmati, this is the self-nature, the first principle, the essence, which constitutes the being of the Tathāgatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones of the past, present, and future, whereby, perfecting things of this world and of a world beyond this, they, by means of a noble eye of transcendental wisdom, enter into various phases of existence, individual and general, and establish them.And what is thus established by them is not to be confused with the erroneous teachings generally held by the philosophers.Mahāmati, what are these erroneous teachings accepted generally by the philosophers?[Their error lies in this] that they do not recognise an objective world to be of Mind itself which is erroneously discriminated;and, not understanding the nature of the Vijñānas which are also no more than manifestations of Mind, like simple-minded ones that they are, they cherish the dualism of being and non-being where there is but [one] self-nature and [one] first principle.Again, Mahāmati, my teaching consists in the cessation of sufferings arising from the discrimination of the triple world; in the cessation of ignorance, desire, deed, and causality; and in the recognition that an objective world, like a vision, is the manifestation of Mind itself.
VII Mahāmati, there are some Brahmans and Sramanas who assume something out of nothing, saying that there exists a substance which is bound up in causation and abides in time, and that the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas have their genesis and continuation in causation and, after thus existing, pass away.They are those, Mahāmati, who hold a destructive and nihilistic view concerning such subjects as continuation, activity, rising, breaking-up, existence, Nirvāṇa, the path, karma, fruition, and truth.(41) Why? Because they have not attained an intuitive understanding [of the Truth], because they have no fundamental insight of things.Mahāmati, it is like a jar broken in pieces which is unable to function as a jar; again, it is like a burnt seed which is incapable of sprouting.Even so, Mahāmati, their Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas which they regard as subject to changes are really incapable of uninterrupted transformation because their views do not originate from the perception of an objective world as a manifestation of Mind itself which is erroneously discriminated.
If again, Mahāmati, something comes out of nothing and there is the rise of the Vijñānas by reason of a combination of the three effect-producing causes, we can say the same of a non-existing thing, that a tortoise would grow hair and sands produce oil.[As this is impossible] this proposition does not avail, it ends in affirming nothing.And, Mahāmati, it follows that deed, work, and cause [of which they speak] will be of no use, and so also with their reference to being and non-being.Mahāmati, when they argue that there is a combination of the three effect-producing causes, they do this by the principle of cause and effect [which is to say, by the principle that something comes out of something and not of nothing]; and thus there are [such things as] past, present, and future, and being and non-being.As long as they remain on their philosophic ground, their demonstration will be by means of their logic and text-books, for the memory of erroneous intellection will ever cling to them.12Thus, Mahāmati, simple-minded ones, poisoned by an erroneous view, declare the incorrect way of thinking taught by the ignorant to be the one presented by the All-Knowing One.
Again, Mahāmati, there are some Brahmans and Sramanas who (42) recognising that the external world which is of Mind itself is seen as such owing to the discrimination and false intellection practised since beginningless time, know that the world has no self-nature and has never been born, it is like a cloud, a ring produced by a firebrand, the castle of the Gandharvas, a vision, a mirage, the moon as reflected in the ocean, and a dream; that Mind in itself has nothing to do with discrimination and causation, discourses of imagination, and terms of qualification (lakshya-lakṣana); that body, property, and abode are objectifications of the Ālayavijñāna,13 which is in itself above [the dualism of] subject and object; that the state of imagelessness which is in compliance with the awakening of Mind itself,14 is not affected by such changes as arising, abiding, and destruction.The Bodhisattvas-Mahāsattvas, Mahāmati, will before long attain to the understanding that Nirvāṇa and Samsara are one.Their conduct, Mahāmati, will be in accordance with the effortless exhibition of a great loving heart that ingeniously contrives means [of salvation], knowing that all beings have the nature of being like a vision or a reflection, and that [there is one thing which is] not bound by causation, being beyond the distinction of subject and object; [and further] seeing that there is nothing outside Mind, and in accordance with a position of unconditionality, they will by degrees pass through the various stages of Bodhisattvahood and will experience the various states of Samādhi, and will by virtue of their faith understand that the triple world is of Mind itself, and thus understanding will attain the Samādhi Māyopama.The Bodhisattvas entering into the state of imagelessness where they see into the truth of Mind-only, arriving at the abode of the Paramitas, and keeping themselves away from the thought of genesis, deed, and discipline, they will attain the Samādhi Vajravimbopama which is in compliance with the Tathāgatakaya and with the transformations of suchness.After achieving a revulsion in the abode [of the Vijñānas], Mahāmati, they will gradually realise the Tathāgatakaya, which is endowed with the powers, the psychic faculties, self-control, love, compassion, and means; which can enter into all the Buddha-lands and into the sanctuaries of the philosophers; and which is beyond the realm of (43) Citta-mano-Manovijñāna.Therefore, Mahāmati, these Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas who wish, by following the Tathāgatakaya, to realise it, should exercise themselves, in compliance with the truth of Mind-only, to desist from discriminating and reasoning erroneously on such notions as Skandhas, Dhātus, Āyatanas, thought, causation, deed, discipline, and rising, abiding, and destruction.
VIII Perceiving that the triple existence is by reason of the habit-energy of erroneous discrimination and false reasoning that has been going on since beginningless time, and also thinking of the state of Buddhahood which is imageless and unborn, [the Bodhisattva] will become thoroughly conversant with the noble truth of self-realisation, will become a perfect master of his own mind, will conduct himself without effort, will be like a gem reflecting a variety of colours, will be able to assume the body of transformation, will be able to enter into the subtle minds of all beings, and, because of his firm belief in the truth of Mind-only, will, by gradually ascending the stages, become established in Buddhahood.Therefore, Mahāmati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva be well disciplined in self-realisation.
IX Then Mahāmati said: Teach me, Blessed One, concerning that most subtle doctrine which explains the Citta, Manas, Manovijñāna, the five Dharmas, the Svabhāvas, and the lakṣanas; which is put in practice by the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas; which is separated from the state of mind which recognises a world as something outside Mind itself; and which, breaking down all the so-called truths established by words and reasonings, constitutes the essence of the teachings of all the Buddhas.Pray teach this assembly headed by the Bodhisattvas gathering on Mount Malaya in the city of Laṅkā; teach them regarding the Dharmakaya which is praised by the Tathāgatas and which is the realm of (44) the Ālayavijñāna which resembles the ocean with its waves.
Then the Blessed One again speaking to Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this: The reasons whereby the eye-consciousness arises are four.What are they? They are: (1) The clinging to an external world, not knowing that it is of Mind itself; (2) The attaching to form and habit-energy accumulated since beginningless time by false reasoning and erroneous views; (3) The self-nature inherent in the Vijñāna; (4) The eagerness for multiple forms and appearances.By these four reasons, Mahāmati, the waves of the evolving Vijñānas are stirred on the Ālayavijñāna which resembles the waters of a flood.The same [can be said of the other sense-consciousnesses] as of the eye-consciousness.This consciousness arises at once or by degrees in every sense-organ including its atoms and pores of the skin; the sense-field is apprehended like a mirror reflecting objects, like the ocean swept over by a wind.Mahāmati, similarly the waves of the mind-ocean are stirred uninterruptedly by the wind of objectivity; cause, deed, and appearance condition one another inseparably; the functioning Vijñānas and the original Vijñāna are thus inextricably bound-up together; and because the self-nature of form, etc., is not comprehended, Mahāmati, the system of the five consciousnesses (Vijñānas) comes to function.Along with this system of the five Vijñānas, there is what is known as Manovijñāna [i.e., the thinking function of consciousness], whereby the objective world is distinguished and individual appearances are distinctly determined, and in this the physical body has its genesis.But the Manovijñāna and other Vijñānas have no thought that they are mutually conditioned and that they grow out of their attachment to the discrimination which is applied to the projections of Mind itself.
Thus the Vijñānas go on functioning mutually related in a most intimate manner and discriminating a world of representations.(45) As the Vijñānas thus go on functioning [without being conscious of their own doings], so the Yogins while entering upon a state of tranquillisation (Samāpatti) are not aware of the workings of the subtle habit-energy [or memory] within themselves;for they think that they would enter upon a state of tranquillisation by extinguishing the Vijñānas.But [in fact] they are in this state without extinguishing the Vijñānas which still subsist because the seeds of habit-energy have not been extinguished; and [what they imagine to be] an extinction is really the non-functioning of the external world to which they are no more attached.So it is, Mahāmati, with the subtle working of the Ālayavijñāna, which, except for the Tathāgata and those Bodhisattvas who are established on the stages, is not easy to comprehend; [especially] by those who practise the discipline belonging to the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, even with their powers of Samādhi and transcendental knowledge, it is difficult to distinguish.Only those who, understanding fully all the aspects of the different stages of Bodhisattvahood by the aid of their transcendental knowledge, acquiring a definite cognition as regards the meaning of the separate propositions, planting roots of goodness in the Buddha-lands that know no limits, and keeping themselves away from the discriminations and false reasonings that arise from recognising an external world which is of Mind itself, would retire into a secluded abode in the forest and devote themselves to the practice of the spiritual discipline, either high, or low, or middling, only those are capable of obtaining an insight into the flowing of Mind itself in a world of discrimination, of being baptised by the Buddhas living in the lands without limits, and of realising the self-control, powers, psychic faculties, and Samādhis.Surrounded by good friends and the Buddhas, Mahāmati, they are capable of knowing the Citta, Manas, Manovijñāna, which are the discriminating agents of an external world whose self-nature is of Mind itself; they are capable of crossing the ocean of birth and death which arises by reason of deed, desire, and ignorance.For this reason, Mahāmati, the Yogins ought to exercise themselves in the discipline which has been given them by their good friends and the Buddhas.
(46) At that time the Blessed One recited the following verses:
99 Like waves that rise on the ocean stirred by the wind, dancing and without interruption,
100 The Ālaya-ocean in a similar manner is constantly stirred by the winds of objectivity, and is seen dancing about with the Vijñānas which are the waves of multiplicity.
101 Dark-blue, red, [and other colours], with salt, conch-shell, milk, honey, fragrance of fruits and flowers, and rays of sunlight;
102 They are neither different nor not-different: the relation is like that between the ocean and its waves. So are the seven Vijñānas joined with the Citta (mind).
103 As the waves in their variety are stirred on the ocean, so in the Ālaya is produced the variety of what is known as the Vijñānas.
104 The Citta, Manas, and Vijñānas are discriminated as regards their form; [but in substance] the eight are not to be separated one from another, for there is neither qualified nor qualifying.
105 As there is no distinction between the ocean and its waves, so in the Citta there is no evolution of the Vijñānas.
106 Karma is accumulated by the Citta, reflected upon by the Manas, and recognised by the Manovijñāna, and the visible world is discriminated by the five Vijñānas.
(47) 107 Varieties of colour such as dark-blue, etc., are presented to our Vijñāna. Tell me, Great Muni, how there are these varieties of colour like waves [on the ocean]?
108 There are no such varieties of colour in the waves; it is for the sake of the simple-minded that the Citta is said to be evolving as regards form.
109 There is no such evolving in the Citta itself, which is beyond comprehension. Where there is comprehension there is that which comprehends as in the case of waves [and ocean].
110 Body, property, and abode are presented as such to our Vijñānas, and thus they are seen as evolving in the same way as are the waves.
111 The ocean is manifestly seen dancing in the state of waveness; how is it that the evolving of the Ālaya is not recognised by the intellect even as the ocean is?15
112 That the Ālaya is compared to the ocean is [only] for the sake of the discriminating intellect of the ignorant; the likeness of the waves in motion is [only] brought out by way of illustration.
113 When the sun rises it shines impartially on people high and low; so thou who art the light of the world shouldst announce the truth (tattvam) to the ignorant.
(48) 114 How is it that in establishing thyself in the Dharma thou announcest not the truth? If the truth is announced by me, the truth is not in the mind.16
115 As the waves appear instantly on the ocean, or [images] in a mirror or a dream, so the mind is reflected in its own sense-fields.17
116 Owing to a deficiency in conditions the evolution [of the Vijñānas] takes place by degrees.18 The function of the Manovijñāna is to recognise and that of the Manas is to reflect upon,
117 While to the five Vijñānas the actual world presents itself. There is no gradation when one is in a state of collectedness (samāhita).19 Like unto a master of painting or his pupils,
11820 Who arrange colours to produce a picture, I teach. The picture is not in the colours, nor in the canvas, nor in the plate;
119 In order to make it attractive to all beings, a picture is presented in colours. What one teaches, transgresses; for the truth (tattva) is beyond words.
120 Establishing myself in the Dharma, I preach the truth for the Yogins. The truth is the state of self-realisation and is beyond categories of discrimination.
121 I teach it to the sons of the Victorious; the teaching is not meant for the ignorant. What is seen as multitudinous is a vision which exists not.
122 The teaching itself is thus variously given, subject to transgression; (49) the teaching is no teaching whatever if it is not to the point in each case.
123 According to the nature of a disease the healer gives its medicine; even so the Buddhas teach beings in accordance with their mentalities.
124 This is indeed not a mental realm to be reached by the philosophers and the Śrāvakas; what is taught by the leaders is the realm of self-realisation.
X Further, Mahāmati, if the Bodhisattva should wish to understand fully that an external world to be subsumed under categories of discrimination, such as the grasping (subject) and the grasped (object), is of Mind itself, let him be kept away from such hindrances as turmoil, social intercourse, and sleep;let him be kept away from the treatises and writings of the philosophers, from things belonging to the vehicles of Śrāvakahood and Pratyekabuddhahood;let the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva be thoroughly acquainted with objects of discrimination which are to be seen as of Mind itself.
XI(a) Further, Mahāmati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva establishes himself in the abode where he has gained a thorough understanding of Mind by means of his transcendental knowledge, he should later discipline himself in the cultivation of noble wisdom in its triple aspect.What are the three aspects of noble wisdom, Mahāmati, in which he has to discipline himself later? They are: (1) imagelessness; (2) the power added by all the Buddhas by reason of their original vows; and (3) the self-realisation attained by noble wisdom.Having mastered them, (50) the Yogin should abandon his knowledge of Mind gained by means of transcendental wisdom, which still resembles a lame donkey; and entering upon the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood, he should further discipline himself in these three aspects of noble wisdom.
Then again, Mahāmati, the aspect of imagelessness comes forth when all things belonging to the Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas and philosophers are thoroughly mastered.Again, Mahāmati, as to the power added, it comes from the original vows made by all the Buddhas.Again, Mahāmati, as to the self-realisation aspect of noble wisdom, it rises when a Bodhisattva, detaching himself from viewing all things in their phenomenality, realises the Samādhi-body whereby he surveys the world as like unto a vision, and further goes on to the attainment of the Buddha-stage.Mahāmati, this is the triplicity of the noble life. Furnished with this triplicity, noble ones will attain the state of self-realisation which is the outcome of noble wisdom.For this reason, Mahāmati, you should cultivate noble wisdom in its triple aspect.
XI(b) At that moment, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva knowing what was going on in the minds of the Bodhisattvas who were gathered there, and empowered by the power added to him by all the Buddhas, asked the Blessed One concerning the doctrine known as examining into the reality of noble wisdom.Tell me, Blessed One, the doctrine of examining into the reality of noble wisdom, depending on which the one hundred and eight statements are to be distinguished—the doctrine depending on which the Tathāgatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones will analyse and disclose the nature and course of false imagination for the sake of (51) the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas who have fallen into the way of looking at things from their aspects of generality and individuality.Thus the Bodhisattvas will be instructed in the analysis and thorough examination of false imagination, and thereby they will have the passage purified which leads to the egolessness of things and persons, and get an illumination on the stages of Bodhisattvahood; and, further, going beyond the bliss of the tranquillisations21 belonging to all the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, will attain the Dharmakaya of the Tathāgata, which belongs to the realm and course of Tathāgatahood transcending thought and in which there is no rising of the five Dharmas. That is to say, they will attain the Tathāgata-body which is the Dharma intimately bound up with the understanding born of transcendental knowledge, and which, entering into the realm of Māyā, reaches all the Buddha-lands, the heavenly mansions of Tuṣita, and the abode of the Akaniṣṭha.
XII Said the Blessed One: Mahāmati, there are some philosophers who are addicted to negativism, according to whose philosophical view the non-existence of the hare's horns is ascertained by means of the discriminating intellect which affirms that the self-nature of things ceases to exist with the destruction of their causes; and they say that all things are non-existent just like the hare's horns.Again, Mahāmati, there are others who, seeing distinctions existing in things as regards the elements, qualities, atoms, substances, formations, and positions, and, attached to the notion that the hare's horns are non-existent, assert that the bull has horns.There are, Mahāmati, those who have fallen into the dualistic way of thinking, being unable to comprehend the truth of Mind-only; they desire to discriminate a world which is of Mind itself.Mahāmati, body, property, and abode have their existence only when measured in discrimination. (52) The hare's horns neither are nor are not; no discrimination is to be made about them. So it is, Mahāmati, with all things, of which neither being nor non-being can be predicated; have no discrimination about them!
Again, Mahāmati, those who have gone beyond being and non-being, no more cherish the thought that the hare has no horns; for they never think that the hare has no horns because of mutual reference,nor do they think that the bull has horns because no ultimate substance is to be obtained however minutely the analysis of the horns may go on even to the subtlest particle known as atom: [that is,] the state in which noble wisdom is realised is beyond being and non-being.
At that time Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this to the Blessed One: Is it not this way, Blessed One, that, seeing how discrimination takes place, we proceed to refer this to the non-rising of discrimination and infer that the horns exist not?The Blessed One said: No, indeed, Mahāmati, the non-existence of the horns has no reference to the non-rising of discrimination.Why is it not so? Because there is discrimination owing to the idea of the horns.Indeed, depending upon the idea of the horns, Mahāmati, discrimination takes place. And because of this dependence of discrimination upon the idea of the horns, Mahāmati, and because of this relationship of dependence and apart from the anyananya22 relationship, one talks of the non-existence of the hare's horns, surely not because of the reference [to the horns of the bull].If again, Mahāmati, discrimination is different (anya) from the hare's horns, (53) it will not take place by reason of the horns [and therefore the one is not different from the other];but if it is not different (ananya), there is a discrimination taking place by reason of the horns [and therefore the one is different from the other].However minutely the atoms are analysed, no horn [-substance] is obtainable; the notion of the horns itself is not available when thus reasoned.As neither of them [that is, the bull's nor the hare's] are existent, in reference to what should we talk of non-existence?Therefore, Mahāmati, the reasoning by reference as regards the non-existence of the hare's horns is of no avail. The non-existence of the hare's horns is asserted in reference to their existence [on the bull; but really a horn itself has no existence from the beginning]; have therefore no discrimination about it! Mahāmati, the dualism of being and non-being as held by the philosophers does not obtain as we see in the reasoning of horns.Again, Mahāmati, there are other philosophers affected with erroneous views, who are attached to such notions as form, cause, and figure; not fully understanding the nature of space and seeing that space is disjoined from form, they proceed to discriminate about their separate existences.
But, Mahāmati, space is form, and, Mahāmati, as space penetrates into form, form is space.To establish the relation of supporting and supported, Mahāmati, there obtains the separation of the two, space and form.Mahāmati, when the elements begin to evolve [a world] they are distinguishable one from another; they do not abide in space, and space is not non-existent in them.It is the same with the hare's horns, Mahāmati, whose non-existence is asserted in reference to the bull's horns.But, Mahāmati, when the bull's horns are analysed to their minutest atoms, which in turn are further analysed, there is after all nothing to be known as atoms.The non-existence of what, is to be affirmed in reference to what? As to the other things, too, this reasoning from reference (54) does not hold true.At that time, again, the Blessed One said this to Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva; Mahāmati, you should discard the views and discriminations that are concerned with the horns of a hare and a bull, with space and form.
And also, Mahāmati, let you and other Bodhisattvas reflect on the nature of discrimination which they have of the Mind itself, and let them go into all the Bodhisattva-lands where they should disclose the way of disciplining themselves in the manifestations of Mind itself.XIII Then at that time the Blessed One recited these verses: 125 The world [as we see it] exists not, pluralities of things rise from the Mind being seen [externally]; body, property, and abode are manifested to us as of the Ālayavijñāna.
126 The leaders talk about the Citta, Manas, [Mano-]Vijñāna, the [triple] Svabhāva, the five Dharmas, the twofold egolessness, and purification.
127 Long and short, etc., exist mutually bound up; when existence is asserted, there is non-existence, and where non-existence is asserted, there is existence.
128 Analysed down to atoms, there is indeed no form to be discriminated as such; what can be established is the [truth of] Mind-only, which is not believed by those who cherish erroneous views.
129 This does not belong to the realm of the theoreticians nor to that of the Śrāvaka; (55) the Buddhas disclose the way of self-realisation.
XIV At that time again, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva made a request of the Blessed One regarding the purification of the outflow which comes from recognising an objective world which is of Mind itself, saying, How, O Blessed One, is the outflow purified that takes place from recognising an external world which is of Mind itself? Is the purification instantaneous or gradual?
Replied the Blessed One: The outflow that takes place from recognising an external world which is of Mind itself is gradually purified and not instantaneously.Mahāmati, it is like the amra fruit which ripens gradually and not instantaneously; in the same way, Mahāmati, the purification of beings23 is gradual and not instantaneous.Mahāmati, it is like the potter making pots, which is done gradually and not instantaneously; in the same way, Mahāmati, the purification of beings by the Tathāgata is gradual and not instantaneous.Mahāmati, it is like grass, shrubs, herbs, and trees, that grow up gradually from the earth and not instantaneously; in the same way, Mahāmati, the purification by the Tathāgata of beings is gradual and not instantaneous;Mahāmati, it is like the mastery of comedy, dancing, singing, music, lute-playing, writing, and [other] arts, which is gained gradually and not instantaneously; in the same way, Mahāmati, the purification by the Tathāgata of all beings is gradual and not instantaneous.Mahāmati, it is like a mirror indiscriminately and instantaneously reflecting in it forms and images; (56) in the same way, Mahāmati, the purification by the Tathāgata of all beings is instantaneous, who makes them free from discrimination and leads them to the state of imagelessness.Mahāmati, it is like the sun or the moon revealing all forms instantaneously by illuminating them with its light; in the same way, Mahāmati, the Tathāgata, by making all beings discard the habit-energy which issues from the erroneous views they entertain in regard to an external world which is of the Mind, instantaneously reveals to all beings the realm of unthinkable knowledge which belongs to Buddhahood.It is like the Ālayavijñāna making instantaneously a world of body, property, and abode, which is what is seen of Mind itself; in the same way, Mahāmati, the Niṣyanda-Buddha, instantaneously maturing the mentality of beings, places them in the palatial abode of the Akaniṣṭha mansion where they will become practisers of various spiritual exercises.Mahāmati, it is like the Dharmatā-Buddha shining forth instantaneously with the rays that issue from the Niṣyanda-Nirmana [-Buddha]; in the same way, Mahāmati, the noble truth of self-realisation instantaneously shines out when the false [dualistic] views of existence and non-existence are discarded.XV And yet again, Mahāmati, what the Dharmatā-Niṣyanda-Buddha [that is, the Buddha that flows out of the absolute Dharma] teaches is that all things are comprehensible under the aspects of individuality and generality, for they are bound up with causes and conditions of habit-energy which is accumulated by not recognising an external world as of Mind itself; that by reason of clinging to these false imaginations there is multitudinousness of unrealities, which resemble the various scenes and persons created magically and imagined as really in existence.
Further again, Mahāmati, false imaginations arise from clinging to the notion of relativity.To illustrate: when the magician depending upon grass, (57) wood, shrubs, and creepers, exercises his art, all beings and forms take shape, magically-created persons are produced, which appear endowed with individuality and material body, and they are variously and fancifully discriminated.While they are thus manifesting themselves, Mahāmati, there is no substantiality in them.Likewise, Mahāmati, based on the notion of relativity the false imagination recognises a variety of appearances which are distinguished by a discriminating mind.And as their individual appearances are imagined and adhered to, there is habit-energy, and, Mahāmati, so long as the fancying goes on we have here all that is needed to constitute the self-nature of the false imagination.Mahāmati, this is the discourse of the Niṣyanda Buddha.Again, Mahāmati, it is the doing of the Dharmatā-Buddha to establish the exalted state of self-realisation which transcends the phenomena of the [empirical] mind.Again, Mahāmati, what the Nirmita-Nirmana-Buddha [or Buddha of transformation] establishes concerns such matters as charity, morality, meditation, tranquillisation, various forms of transcendental knowledge and of understanding, the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas, emancipation, the Vijñānas, and the ways in which they function, the forms which they take, their distinctions and their performances.The Buddha discloses against the philosophical views that which surpasses forms.Again Mahāmati, the Dharmatā-Buddha is unconditioned, free from conditions, has nothing to do with all doings, senses, and measurements, and does not belong to the world of the ignorant, Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, who are always clinging to the notion of an ego.For this reason, Mahāmati, you should discipline yourself in the excellent and exalted way leading to self-realisation;(58) you should keep yourself away from the views that recognise the reality of an external world apart from the Mind itself.XVI Further again, Mahāmati, in the life of the Śrāvaka-vehicle, there are two aspects to be distinguished, namely, the excellent and exalted state of self-realisation, and the attachment to the notion of self-nature arising from discrimination.
What is the excellent, exalted state of self-realisation belonging to the Śrāvakas? This is a state of mental concentration which is attained when one realises states of emptiness, egolessness, suffering, and impermanence, and the truth that is free from passions and is ever serene; when one annihilates notions belonging to the externality of things, such as the Skandhas, Dhātus, Āyatanas, individuality and generality; and when one has an insight into reality as it is.Entering upon this state of mental concentration the Śrāvakas will attain the blissful abode of exalted self-realisation in which there is the emancipation belonging to a Dhyāna, the path and fruit of a Samādhi, and the deliverance of a Samāpatti, but in which there is as yet no discarding of habit-energy and no escape from the imperceivable transformation of death.This, Mahāmati, is the Śrāvaka's exalted state of self-realisation.Having attained this exalted and blissful condition of self-realisation as realised by the Śrāvakas, Mahāmati, the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva may not enjoy by himself the bliss of cessation, the bliss of Samāpatti, but should think compassionately of other beings and keep ever fresh his original vows.Mahāmati, in whatever exalted and blissful state of self-realisation the Bodhisattva may find himself, he should never exert himself in the exalted and blissful state of self-realisation as attained by the Śrāvakas.(59) Mahāmati, what is meant by the attachment to the notion of self-nature arising from discrimination?This attachment takes place when a man, seeing that the elements and the qualities such as blue, yellow, warmth, humidity, motility, and rigidity, have never been created by a creator, yet clings to the notions of individuality and generality in accordance with the measures laid down in books of logic.Mahāmati, the Bodhisattva, knowing what this is, must abandon it.Conforming himself to the egolessness of things and holding back the wrong views regarding the egolessness of a person, the Bodhisattva should keep himself on the continuously-ascending journey along the stages.This is the Śrāvaka's attachment to the notion of self-nature arising from the discrimination of existence.XVII At that time Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this to the Blessed One:
According to the Blessed One's teaching, the eternal-unthinkable is the exalted condition of self-realisation and also of highest reality.Now, do not the philosophers also talk about the creative agent being the eternal-unthinkable?The Blessed One replied: No, Mahāmati, the eternal-unthinkable considered by the philosophers to be characteristic of their creator is untenable.Why? Because, Mahāmati, the eternal-unthinkable as held by the philosophers is not in conformity with the idea of a cause itself.When, Mahāmati, this eternal-unthinkable is not in conformity with the idea of a cause itself how can this be proved tenable?(60) Again, Mahāmati, if what is claimed to be the eternal-unthinkable is in conformity with the idea of a cause [which is eternal] in itself, it can be eternal; but since the idea of a creator is based upon that of a [further] cause, it cannot be the eternal-unthinkable.But, Mahāmati, my highest reality is the eternal-unthinkable since it conforms to the idea of a cause and is beyond existence and non-existence.Because it is the exalted state of self-realisation it has its own character; because it is the cause of the highest reality it has its causation; because it has nothing to do with existence and non-existence it is no doer; because it is to be classed under the same head as space, Nirvāṇa, and cessation it is eternal.Therefore, Mahāmati, it is not the same as the eternal-unthinkable of the philosophers;the eternal-unthinkable of the Tathāgatas is thatness realised by noble wisdom within themselves.For this reason, Mahāmati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva discipline himself in order to attain by means of noble wisdom the truth of self-realisation which is the eternal-unthinkable.Again, further, Mahāmati, the eternal-unthinkable of the philosophers is not characterised with eternality because it has a cause which is not eternal;
what they regard as eternal is not eternal as it is not characterised with the power that can create itself.If again, Mahāmati, the philosophers prove the eternality of their eternal-unthinkable in contradistinction to the becoming and therefore the non-eternality of things created, Mahāmati, by the same reasoning (61) I can prove that their eternality has no reason to be known as such just because things created are non-eternal owing to their becoming.If again, Mahāmati, the eternal-unthinkable of the philosophers is in conformity with the idea of a cause, what they regard as characteristic of a cause is a non-entity like the horns of a hare; and, Mahāmati, their eternal-unthinkable is no more than a verbal discrimination, in which, Mahāmati, the philosophers' fault consists.
Why? Because, Mahāmati, mere verbal discriminations are, indeed, the hare's horns, on account of their having no characteristic of a self-cause.Mahāmati, moreover, my eternal-unthinkable is really eternal because it finds its cause in the exalted state of self-realisation, and because it has nothing to do with a creator, with being and non-being.Its eternality is not derived from the reasoning which is based upon the external notion of being and non-being, of eternity and non-eternity.If the eternal-unthinkable is eternal in consideration of the non-existence and eternality of external things, we can say of this kind of the eternal-unthinkable that the philosophers do not know what is meant by characteristically self-caused.As they are outside the state of self-realisation attainable by noble wisdom, Mahāmati, their discourse is not to the point.XVIII Further, Mahāmati, those who, afraid of sufferings arising from the discrimination of birth-and-death, seek for Nirvāṇa, do not know that birth-and-death and Nirvāṇa are not to be separated the one from the other; and, seeing that all things subject to discrimination have no reality, imagine that Nirvāṇa consists in the future annihilation of the senses and their fields.
(62) They are not aware, Mahāmati, of the fact that Nirvāṇa is the Ālayavijñāna where a revulsion takes place by self-realisation.Therefore, Mahāmati, those who are stupid talk of the trinity of vehicles and not of the state of Mind-only where there are no images.Therefore, Mahāmati, those who do not understand the teachings of the Tathāgatas of the past, present, and future, concerning the external world, which is of Mind itself, cling to the notion that there is a world outside what is seen of the Mindand, Mahāmati, go on rolling themselves along the wheel of birth-and-death.XIX Further, Mahāmati, according to the teaching of the Tathāgatas of the past, present, and future, all things are unborn.
Why? Because they have no reality, being manifestations of Mind itself, and, Mahāmati, as they are not born of being and non-being, they are unborn.Mahāmati, all things are like the horns of the hare, horse, donkey, or camel,but the ignorant and simple-minded who are given up to their false and erroneous imaginations, discriminate things where they are not; therefore, all things are unborn.That all things are in their self-nature unborn, Mahāmati, belongs to the realm of self-realisation attained by noble wisdom, and does not belong essentially to the realm of dualistic discrimination cherished by the ignorant and simple-minded.The self-nature and the characteristic marks of body, property, and abode evolve when the Ālayavijñāna is conceived by the ignorant as grasping and grasped; and then they fall into a dualistic view of existence where they recognise its rise, abiding, and disappearance, cherishing the idea that all things are born and subject to discrimination as to being and non-being.(63) Therefore, Mahāmati, you should discipline yourself therein [i.e. in self-realisation].XX Again further, Mahāmati, there are five groups of people, each of whom attains its own [spiritual] insight.
What are the five? They are: (1) the group of people whose insight belongs to the Śrāvaka-vehicle; (2) the group of people whose insight belongs to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle; (3) the group of people whose insight belongs to the Tathāgata-vehicle; (4) the group of indefinite character; and (5) the group of people to whom no insight is possible.Mahāmati, how does one know the group of people whose insight belongs to the Śrāvaka vehicle? There are people the hair of whose body will stand on end when they know and realise the nature of the Skandhas, Dhātus, Āyatanas, and [what is meant by] generality and individuality;their intellect will leap with joy on knowing and practising what belongs to appearance and not on practising what they know of the uninterrupted chain of causation, —such ones, Mahāmati, are said to be of the group whose insight belongs to the Śrāvaka vehicle.Having had an insight into their own vehicle, they abide at the fifth or the sixth stage where they do away with the rising of the passions, but not with the habit-energy; they have not yet passed beyond the inconceivable transformation-death, and their lion-roar is, “My life is destroyed, my morality is established, etc."; they will then discipline themselves in the egolessness of persons and finally gain the knowledge of Nirvāṇa.Again, Mahāmati, there are others who, believing in such things as ego, being, vital principle, nourisher, supreme spirit, or personal soul, will seek Nirvāṇa in them.
Again, Mahāmati, there are still others who, seeing that all things exist by depending upon causes, will recognise in this the way to Nirvāṇa.(64) But, Mahāmati, as they have no insight into the egolessness of things, there is no emancipation for them.This, Mahāmati, is where those of the Śrāvaka-vehicle and the philosophers make the mistake in their insight by regarding non-deliverance as deliverance.Therefore, Mahāmati, you ought to discipline yourself in order to escape this wrong view.Now, Mahāmati, they belong to the group of the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle who will shed tears and feel the hair of their body stand on end when the Pratyekabuddha's insight is shown to them.
When the teaching to keep themselves away from social relations and entanglements, not to become attached to the external world and its manifold form, to perform miraculous powers by which they can divide their own body and appear double or perform the transformations, is disclosed to them, they are thereby entreated.Recognising that they are of the group whose insight belong to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle, their discourses will be in conformity with the insight of the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle.This, Mahāmati, is the characteristic feature of the group of people whose insight belongs to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle.Now, Mahāmati, three aspects are distinguishable in the insight belonging to the group of the Tathāgata-vehicle.
They are: (1) an insight whereby one sees into the self-nature of things, which is no self-nature; (2) an exalted insight which is the attainment of self-realisation; and (3) an insight into the immensity of the external Buddha-lands.When, Mahāmati, these three aspects are disclosed one after another and also when the inconceivable realm of the Ālayavijñāna is disclosed, where body, property, and abode are seen to be the manifestation of Mind itself, a man will not be frightened, nor terrified, nor show any sign of fear; then such a one is to be known as of the group of people whose insight belongs to the Tathāgata-vehicle.This is, (65) Mahāmati, the characteristic feature of the insight of those who belong to the Tathāgata-vehicle.Again, Mahāmati, when these three forms of insight are disclosed to a man, he may thereby be pursuaded to discipline himself in them.
This, Mahāmati, is the stage of preparation for the establishment of his own group.In order that he may go up to the stage of imagelessness, there is this establishment.But the Śrāvaka who will purify his own habit-energy of passions by attaining an inner perception into the Ālaya and by seeing into the egolessness of things, will settle himself in the bliss of the Samādhi and finally will attain the body of Tathāgatahood.24XXI Then the Blessed One recited these verses: 130 The fruit of the Stream-entered, and that of the Once-to-come; the fruit of the Not-to-come and Arhatship— all these are due to mental perturbation.
131 The triple vehicle, the one vehicle, and the no-vehicle, of these I talk, for the sake of the dull-witted, and [also] for the wise, solitude-loving ones.
132 The gate of highest reality has nothing to do with the two forms of thought-construction [subject and object]; Where the imageless stands, why should we establish the triple vehicles?
133 The Dhyānas, the immeasurables, and the no-form Samādhis, and the thought-cessation—all these are not at all found in Mind-only.
XXII Again, Mahāmati, how is it that the Icchantika25 never awaken the desire for emancipation? (66) Because they have abandoned all the stock of merit, and because they cherish certain vows for all beings since beginningless time.
What is meant by abandoning all the stock of merit? It refers to [those Buddhists] who have abandoned the Bodhisattva collection [of the canonical texts], making the false accusation that they are not in conformity with the sūtras, the codes of morality, and the emancipation. By this they have forsaken all the stock of merit and will not enter into Nirvāṇa.Secondly again, Mahāmati, there are Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas who, on account of their original vows made for all beings, saying, “So long as they do not attain Nirvāṇa, I will not attain it myself," keep themselves away from Nirvāṇa.This, Mahāmati, is the reason of their not entering into Nirvāṇa, and because of this they go on the way of the Icchantika.Again, Mahāmati said; Who, Blessed One, would never enter Nirvāṇa?
The Blessed One replied: Knowing that all things are in Nirvāṇa itself from the very beginning, the Bodhisattva-Icchantika would never enter Nirvāṇa.But those Icchantikas who have forsaken all the stock of merit [finally] do.Those Icchantikas, Mahāmati, who have forsaken all the stock of merit might some day be influenced by the power of the Tathāgatas and be induced at any moment to foster the stock of merit.Why? Because, Mahāmati, no beings are left aside by the Tathāgatas.For this reason, Mahāmati, it is the Bodhisattva-Icchantika (67) who never enters into Nirvāṇa.XXIII Further, Mahāmati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva be well acquainted with the three kinds of Svabhāva (self-nature).
[What are the three? They are (1) false discrimination, (2) knowledge of relativity, and (3) perfect knowledge.] Now, Mahāmati, false discrimination rises from form (nimitta).How, Mahāmati, does it rise from form? In [the consideration of] the relativity aspect of Svabhāva, realities appear in various ways, as having forms, signs, and shapes;when, Mahāmati, these objects, forms, and signs are adhered to [as real], this adherence takes place in two ways.The Tathāgatas, Arhats, and Fully-Enlightened Ones thus declare false discrimination to consist in attachment to names and attachment to objects.By the attachment to objects is meant, Mahāmati, to get attached to inner and external things [as realities].By the attachment to names is meant to recognise in these inner and external things the characteristic marks of individuality and generality and to regard them as definitely belonging to the objects.These two modes of attachment, Mahāmati, constitute false discrimination.The knowledge of the relativity-aspect (paratantra) rises from the separation of subject (asraya) and object (alambana).Now, Mahāmati, what is perfect knowledge? It is realised when one casts aside the discriminating notions of form, name, reality, and character; it is the inner realisation by noble wisdom.This (68) perfect knowledge, Mahāmati, is the essence of the Tathāgata-garbha.Then the Blessed One recited this verse: 134 Form, Name, and Discrimination [correspond to] the two forms of Svabhāva, and Right Knowledge and Suchness [correspond to] the Perfect Knowledge aspect.
This, Mahāmati, is called the doctrine that examines into the nature of the five Dharmas and the two Svabhāvas (self-nature), and constitutes the state of self-realisation attained by noble wisdom, and in this you and other Bodhisattvas are to discipline yourselves.
XXIV Further again, Mahāmati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva have a thorough understanding as to the nature of the twofold egolessness.
Mahāmati, what is this twofold egolessness? [It is the egolessness of persons and the egolessness of things.What is meant by egolessness of persons? It means that] in the collection of the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas there is no ego-substance, nor anything belonging to it; the Vijñāna is originated by ignorance, deed, and desire, and keeps up its function by grasping objects by means of the sense-organs, such as the eye, etc., and by clinging to them as real; while a world of objects and bodies is manifested owing to the discrimination that takes place in the world which is of Mind itself, that is, in the Ālayavijñāna.By reason of the habit-energy stored up by false imagination since beginningless time, this world (vishaya) is subject to change and destruction from moment to moment; it is like a river, a seed, a lamp, wind, a cloud; [while the Vijñāna itself is] like a monkey who is always restless, like a fly who is ever in search of unclean things and defiled places, like a fire (69) which is never satisfied. Again, it is like a water-drawing wheel or a machine, it [i.e., the Vijñāna] goes on rolling the wheel of transmigration, carrying varieties of bodies and forms, resuscitating the dead like the demon Vetala, causing the wooden figures to move about as a magician moves them.Mahāmati, a thorough understanding concerning these phenomena is called comprehending the egolessness of persons.Now, Mahāmati, what is meant by the egolessness of things? It is to realise that the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas are characterised with the nature of false discrimination.
Mahāmati, since the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas are destitute of an ego-substance, being no more than an aggregation of the Skandhas, and subject to the conditions of mutual origination which are causally bound up with the string of desire and deed; and since thus there is no creating agent in them, Mahāmati, the Skandhas are even destitute of the marks of individuality and generality; and the ignorant, owing to their erroneous discrimination, imagine here the multiplicity of phenomena; the wise, however, do not.Recognising, Mahāmati, that all things are devoid of the Citta, Manas, Manovijñāna, the five Dharmas, and the [three] Svabhāvas, the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva will well understand what is meant by the egolessness of things.Again, Mahāmati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva has a good understanding as regards the egolessness of things, before long he will attain the first stage [of Bodhisattvahood] when he gets a definite cognition of the imageless.When a definite acquisition is obtained regarding the aspect of the stages [of Bodhisattvahood], the Bodhisattva will experience joy, and, gradually and successively going up the scale, will reach the ninth stage where his insight is perfected, and [finally the tenth stage known as] Great Dharmamegha.Establishing himself here, (70) he will be seated in the great jewel palace known as “Great Lotus Throne" which is in the shape of a lotus and is adorned with various sorts of jewels and pearls; he will then acquire and complete a world of Māyā-nature; surrounded by Bodhisattvas of the same character and anointed like the son of the Cakravarti by the hands of the Buddhas coming from all the Buddha-lands,he will go beyond the last stage of Bodhisattvahood, attain the noble truth of self-realisation, and become a Tathāgata endowed with the perfect freedom of the Dharmakaya, because of his insight into the egolessness of things.This, Mahāmati, is what is meant by the egolessness of all things,and in this you and other Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas should well exercise yourselves.XXV At that time, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this to the Blessed One:
Pray teach me about making an assertion and refuting it so that I and other Bodhisattvas, getting rid of the erroneous views that may rise from assertion and refutation, may at once realise supreme enlightenment.Having been enlightened they would keep themselves away from the eternalistic assertions as well as from the nihilistic refutations, and leave your enlightenment eye unrefuted.Then the Blessed One again, understanding the request of Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva, recited this verse:
135 Assertions and refutations are not to be found in the Mind-only; the ignorant who understand not that the Mind is [seen in] the form of body, property, and abode, wander about with assertions and refutations.
(71) At that moment the Blessed One said this to elucidate the meaning of this verse: Mahāmati, there are four forms of assertion made concerning things not in existence.
What are the four? (1) The assertion about individual marks that are non-existent; (2) the assertion about philosophical views which are non-existent [i.e., not true]; (3) the assertion about a cause which is non-existent; and (4) the assertion about objects that are non-existent.These, Mahāmati, are the four assertions.Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the refutation?
It means not examining properly, because of ignorance, any assertions based on errors.This, Mahāmati, is what characterises assertion and refutation.Further, Mahāmati, what are the characteristics of the assertion made about individual marks that have no existence?
It concerns the marks of individuality and generality in the Skandhas, Dhātus and Āyatanas, which do not really exist; but taking them for realities and getting attached to them, a man may affirm that they are just so and not otherwise.This, Mahāmati, characterises the assertion of individual marks which are non-existent.26This assertion and discrimination, Mahāmati, concerning individual marks that are not existent, rises from one's attachment to the habit-energy which is amassed, since beginningless time, by varieties of erroneous views issuing from false imagination.
This, Mahāmati, characterises the assertion of individual marks which are non-existent.Again, Mahāmati, by the assertion of philosophical views which are non-existent [i.e., not true], is meant that in the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas, [some philosophers] assume the existence of an ego, a being, a soul, a living being, a nourisher, or a spirit.
This is said, Mahāmati, to be the assertion of some philosophical views which are nonexistent [i.e., not true].Again, Mahāmati, by the assertion of a cause that is nonexistent is meant that [some philosophers] assume the causeless birth of a first (72) Vijñāna, which later comes to have a Māyā-like non-existence; that is to say, the originally unborn Vijñāna begins to function under the conditions of eye, form, light, and memory.
The functioning goes on for a while and then ceases.This, Mahāmati, is the assertion of a cause that is non-existent.Again, Mahāmati, the assertion about objects that are not-existent is an assertion arising from the attachment to such non-working existences as space, cessation, and Nirvāṇa.
These, Mahāmati, are neither existent nor nonexistent;for all things are devoid of the alternatives of being and non-being and are to be known, Mahāmati, as the horns of a hare, a horse, or a camel, or like a hair-net.They are discriminated as realities by the ignorant who are addicted to assertions and refutations as their intelligence has not penetrated into the truth that there is nothing but what is seen of the Mind itself. It is otherwise with the wise.This, Mahāmati, is the characteristic point of the assertion about objects which are non-existent.For this reason, Mahāmati, one should avoid the views based on assertion and refutation.XXVI Further, Mahāmati, the Bodhisattvas who are thoroughly acquainted with the nature of the Citta, Manas, and Manovijñāna, of the five Dharmas, of the [three] Svabhāvas, and of the twofold Egolessness, will assume various personalities for the sake of benefitting others,
just like the imagination that evolves from the seat of the relativity knowledge, and again, like the mysterious gem that reflects varieties of colours.Going over to all the Buddha-lands and assemblages, the Bodhisattvas will listen to the Buddhas, discourse on the nature of all things which are like a vision, a dream, an illusion, a reflection, and the lunar vision in water, and which have nothing to do with birth-and-death, eternality, and extinction; the Bodhisattvas, thus facing the Tathāgatas, will listen to their discourses on the truth that does not belong to the Śrāvaka- and Pratyekabuddha-vehicle.They will then attain a hundred thousand Samādhis, (73) indeed, a hundred thousand niyutas of kotis of Samādhis, and by means of these Samādhis they will go around from one country to another;they will do homage to the Buddhas, be born in all the celestial mansions, where they will discourse on the Triple Treasure, manifesting Buddha-bodies; and, surrounded by Śrāvakas and Bodhisattvas, they will, in order to free them from the alternatives of being and non-being, instruct them to understand thoroughly what is meant by an objective world which is nothing but Mind itself and in which there are no realities.
At that time the Blessed One recited this verse: 136 When those who are born of the Buddha see that the world is no more than Mind itself, they will obtain a body of transformation, which has nothing to do with effect-producing works, but which is endowed with the powers, psychic faculties, and self-control.
XXVII At that time again Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva made a request of the Blessed One.Tell me, Blessed One, how all things are empty, unborn, non-dual, and have no self-nature, so that I and other Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas might be awakened in the teaching of emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and the absence of self-nature, and, quitting the discrimination of being and non-being, quickly realise the highest enlightenment.
Then the Blessed One said this to Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva: Now, Mahāmati, listen well and reflect well upon what I tell you.Replied Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva, I will indeed, Blessed One.(74) The Blessed One said: Emptiness, emptiness, indeed! Mahāmati, it is a term whose self-nature is false imagination.Because of one's attachment to false imagination, Mahāmati, we have to talk of emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and absence of self-nature.In short, then, Mahāmati, there are seven kinds of emptiness: (1) The emptiness of individual marks (lakṣana), (2) the emptiness of self-nature (bhavaSvabhāva), (3) the emptiness of no-work (apracarita), (4) the emptiness of work (pracarita), (5) the emptiness of all things in the sense that they are unpredicable (nirabhilapya), (6) the emptiness in its highest sense of ultimate reality realisable only by noble wisdom, and (7) the emptiness of mutuality (itaretara) which is the seventh.
Mahāmati, what then is the emptiness of individual marks? It is that all things have no [such distinguishing] marks of individuality and generality.In consideration of mutuality and accumulation, [things are thought to be realities], but when they are further investigated and analysed, Mahāmati, they are non-existent, and not predicable with individuality and generality;and because thus no such ideas as self, other, or both, hold good, Mahāmati, the individual marks no longer obtain.So it is said that all things are empty as to their self-marks.
Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of self-nature? Mahāmati, it is that all things in their self-nature are unborn, hence the emptiness of self-nature,and it is therefore said that things are empty in their self-nature.
Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of no-work? It is that the Skandhas are Nirvāṇa itself and there is no work doing in them from the beginning.Therefore, one speaks of the emptiness of no-work.
(75) Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of work? It is that the Skandhas are devoid of an ego and its belongings, and go on functioning when there is a mutual conjunction of cause and action.Thus one speaks of the emptiness of work.
Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of all things in the sense that they are unpredicable? It is that the nature of the false imagination is not expressible, hence the emptiness of all things in the sense of their unpredicability.Thus one speaks of the emptiness of unpredicability.
Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness in its highest sense of ultimate reality realisable by noble wisdom? It is that in the attainment of an inner realisation by means of noble wisdom there is no trace of habit-energy generated by all the erroneous conceptions [of beginningless past].Thus one speaks of the highest emptiness of ultimate reality realisable by noble wisdom.
Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by the emptiness of mutual [non-existence]? It is this: when a thing is missing here, one speaks of its being empty there.For instance, Mahāmati, in the lecture-hall of the Mrigarama there are no elephants, no bulls, no sheep, but as to the Bhikshus I can say that the hall is not devoid of them;it is empty only as far as they [i.e. the animals] are concerned.Further, Mahāmati, it is not that the lecture-hall is devoid of its own characteristics, nor that the Bhikshu is devoid of this Bhikshuhood, nor that in some other places, too, elephants, bulls, and sheep are not to be found.Mahāmati, here one sees all things in their aspect of individuality and generality, but from the point of view of mutuality (itaretara) some things do not exist somewhere.Thus one speaks of the emptiness of mutual [non-existence].
These, Mahāmati, are the seven kinds of emptiness of which mutuality ranks the lowest of all and is to be put away by you.
(76) Again, Mahāmati, not that things are not born, but that they are not born of themselves, except when seen in the state of Samādhi—this is what is meant by “all things are unborn."To have no self-nature is, according to the deeper sense, to be unborn, Mahāmati.That all things are devoid of self-nature means that there is a constant and uninterrupted becoming, a momentary change from one state of existence to another; seeing this, Mahāmati, all things are destitute of self-nature.So one speaks of all things having no self-nature.
Again, Mahāmati, what is meant by non-duality? It means that light and shade, long and short, black and white, are relative terms, Mahāmati, and not independent of each other;as Nirvāṇa and Samsara are, all things are not-two.There is no Nirvāṇa except where is Samsara;there is no Samsara except where is Nirvāṇa; for the condition of existence is not of mutually-exclusive character.27Therefore, it is said that all things are non-dual as are Nirvāṇa and Samsara.For this reason, Mahāmati, you should discipline yourself in [the realisation of] emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and no-self-nature.
Then at that time the Blessed One recited this couplet of verses: 137 I always preach emptiness which is beyond eternalism and nihilism; Samsara is like a dream and a vision, and karma vanishes not.
138 Space, Nirvāṇa, and the two forms of cessation— thus (77) the ignorant discriminate the things which are not effect-producing, but the wise stand above being and non-being.
At that time again, the Blessed One said this to Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva:This [teaching of] emptiness, no-birth, non-duality, and no-self-nature is found in all the sūtras of all the Buddhas, and this doctrine is recognised in every one of them.However, Mahāmati, the sūtras are the teaching in conformity with the dispositions of all beings and deviate from the [real] sense, and not the truth-preserving statement.Mahāmati, it is like unto the mirage which entices the deer with its treacherous springs, the springs are not there but the deer are attached, imagining them to be real.So with the teachings disclosed in all the sūtras, they are for all beings for the gratification of their own discriminating minds.They are not the truth-preserving statements meant for noble wisdom to grasp.For this reason, Mahāmati, be in conformity with the sense and be not engrossed in the word-teaching.
XXVIII At that time, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this to the Blessed One:Now the Blessed One makes mention of the Tathāgata-garbha in the sūtras,and verily it is described by you as by nature bright and pure, as primarily unspotted, endowed with the thirty-two marks of excellence,hidden in the body of every being like a gem of great value, which is enwrapped in a dirty garment, enveloped in the garment of the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas, and soiled with the dirt of greed, anger, folly, and false imagination, (78) while it is described by the Blessed One to be eternal, permanent, auspicious, and unchangeable.Is not this Tathāgata-garbha taught by the Blessed One the same as the ego-substance taught by the philosophers?The ego as taught in the systems of the philosophers is an eternal creator, unqualified, omnipresent, and imperishable.
The Blessed One replied: No, Mahāmati, my Tathāgata-garbha is not the same as the ego taught by the philosophers;for what the Tathāgatas teach is the Tathāgata-garbha in the sense, Mahāmati, that it is emptiness, reality-limit, Nirvāṇa, being unborn, unqualified, and devoid of will-effort; the reason why the Tathāgatas who are Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones, teach the doctrine pointing to the Tathāgata-garbha is to make the ignorant cast aside their fear when they listen to the teaching of egolessness and to have them realise the state of non-discrimination and imagelessness.I also wish, Mahāmati, that the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas of the present and future would not attach themselves to the idea of an ego [imagining it to be a soul].Mahāmati, it is like a potter who manufactures various vessels out of a mass of clay of one sort by his own manual skill and labour combined with a rod, water, and thread, Mahāmati, that the Tathāgatas preach the egolessness of things which removes all the traces of discrimination by various skilful means issuing from their transcendental wisdom, that is, sometimes by the doctrine of the Tathāgata-garbha, sometimes by that of egolessness, and, like a potter, by means of various terms, expressions, and synonyms.For this reason, Mahāmati, the philosophers' doctrine of an ego-substance is not the same (79) as the teaching of the Tathāgata-garbha.Thus, Mahāmati, the doctrine of the Tathāgata-garbha is disclosed in order to awaken the philosophers from their clinging to the idea of the ego, so that those minds that have fallen into the views imagining the non-existent ego as real, and also into the notion that the triple emancipation is final, may rapidly be awakened to the state of supreme enlightenment.Accordingly, Mahāmati, the Tathāgatas who are Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones disclose the doctrine of the Tathāgata-garbha which is thus not to be known as identical with the philosopher's notion of an ego-substance.Therefore, Mahāmati, in order to abandon the misconception cherished by the philosophers, you must strive after the teaching of egolessness and the Tathāgata-garbha.
XXIX At that moment then the Blessed One recited this verse: 139 The personal soul, continuity, the Skandhas, causation, atoms, the supreme spirit, the ruler, the creator, —[they are] discriminations in the Mind-only.28
XXX At that time Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva in consideration of future generations made this request again of the Blessed One: Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the perfecting of the discipline whereby the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas become great Yogins.The Blessed One replied: There are four things, Mahāmati, by fulfilling which the Bodhisattvas become great Yogins.What are the four? They are: (1) To have a clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind itself,29 (2) to discard the notions of birth, (80) abiding, and disappearance, (3) to look into [the truth] that no external world obtains, and (4) to seek for the attainment of inner realisation by noble wisdom.Provided with these four things the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas become great Yogins.
How, Mahāmati, does the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva come to have a clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind itself?He comes to it by recognising that this triple world is nothing but Mind itself, devoid of an ego and its belongings, with no strivings, no comings-and-goings; that this triple world is manifested and imagined as real, under the influence of the habit-energy accumulated since beginningless time by false reasoning and imagination, and with the multiplicity of objects and actions in close relationship, and in conformity with the ideas of discrimination, such as body, property, and abode.Thus, Mahāmati, the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva acquires a thoroughly clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind itself.
How again, Mahāmati, does the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva discard notions of birth, abiding, and disappearance?By this it is meant that all things are to be regarded as forms born of a vision or a dream and have never been created since there are no such things as self, the other, or bothness.[The Bodhisattvas] will see that the external world exists only in conformity with Mind-only; and seeing that there is no stirring of the Vijñānas and that the triple world is a complicated network of causation and owes its rise to discrimination, (81) they find that all things, inner and external, are beyond predicability, that there is nothing to be seen as self-nature, and that [the world] is not to be viewed as born; and thereby they will conform themselves to the insight that things are of the nature of a vision, etc., and attain to the recognition that things are unborn.Establishing themselves on the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood, they will experience a revulsion [in their consciousness] by transcending the Citta, Manas, and Manovijñāna, and the five Dharmas, and the [three] Svabhāvas, and the twofold Egolessness, and thereby attain the mind-made body (Manomayakāya).
Thus, Mahāmati, the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva will discard the notion of birth, abiding, and disappearance.30 Said Mahāmati,31 what is meant by the will-body, Blessed One?The Blessed One replied: It means that one [in this body] can speedily move unobstructed as he wills; hence the will-body, Mahāmati.For instance, Mahāmati, the will [or mind] travels unobstructed over mountains, walls, rivers, trees, etc., many a hundred thousand yojanas they may be away, when a man recollects the scenes which had previously come into his perception, while his own mind keeps on functioning in his body without the least interruption or hindrance.In the same fashion, Mahāmati, the will-body, in the attainment of the Samādhi called Māyā-like and adorned with such marks as the powers, the psychic faculties, and the self-control, will be born in the noble paths and assemblies, moving about as freely as he wishes, as he recalls his original vows and worlds in order to bring all beings to maturity.32
Then, Mahāmati, what is meant by the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva (82) having a good insight into the non-existence of external objects?It means, Mahāmati, that all things are like unto a mirage, a dream, a hair-net;and seeing that all things are here essentially because of our attachment to the habit-energy of discrimination which has been maturing since beginningless time on account of false imagination and erroneous speculation, the Bodhisattvas will seek after the attainment of self-realisation by their noble wisdom.Mahāmati, furnished with these four things, Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas become great Yogins.Therefore, in these, Mahāmati, you should exercise yourself.
XXXI At that time Mahāmati again made a request of the Blessed One:Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the causation of all things, whereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas can see into the nature of causation, and by getting rid of the discrimination [which issues in the philosophical views of] eternalism and nihilism, we may no more discriminate as to the gradual or simultaneous rising of all things.
Replied the Blessed One: Mahāmati, there are two factors of causation by which all things come into existence: external and inner.Mahāmati, the external factors are a lump of clay, a stick, a wheel, thread, water, a worker, and his labour, the combination of all of which produces a jar.As with the jar, Mahāmati, which is made of a lump of clay, or a piece of cloth made of thread, or a matting made of fragrant grass, or the sprout growing out of a seed, or fresh butter which is produced from sour milk by a man churning it with his own labour, (83) so it is, Mahāmati, with all things which, governed by external causes, appear one after another in continuous succession.
As regards the inner factors of causation, Mahāmati, they are of such kind as ignorance, desire, and action, which make up our idea of causation.Born of these, Mahāmati, there is the manifestation of the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas.They are not separable [realities]33 but discriminated [as such] by the ignorant.
Now, Mahāmati, there are six causes: (1) possibility-cause, (2) dependence-cause, (3) objectivity-cause, (4) agency-cause, (5) manifesting-cause, and (6) indifference-cause.34The possibility-cause means, Mahāmati, that when a cause to be becomes effective there is the rising of things inner and outer.The dependence-cause means, Mahāmati, that when conditions to be, become effective there is the rising of the Skandha-seeds, etc., inner and outer.Further, the objectivity-cause means, Mahāmati, that bound by the objective world [the Vijñāna] keeps up its continuous activity.Again, Mahāmati, the agency-cause means that like a sovereign king a cause invested with supreme authority asserts itself.Again, the manifesting-cause means that when the discriminating faculty rises, as the result it reveals individual marks as a lamp does forms, etc.Lastly, the indifference-cause means that when there is a dissolution (84) the power of combination discontinues, and there rises a state of non-discrimination.
These, Mahāmati, are the outcome of discrimination carried on by the ignorant and simple-minded, and there is no gradual nor simultaneous rising of existence.Why? Because, Mahāmati, if there is a simultaneous rising of existence, there would be no distinction between cause and effect, and there would be nothing to characterise a cause as such.If a gradual rising is admitted, there is no substance that holds together individual signs, which makes gradual rising impossible.While a child is not yet born, Mahāmati, the term father has no significance.35The logician argues that there is that which is born and that which gives birth by the mutual functioning of such causal factors as cause, subsistence, continuity, acceleration, and others; and they conclude that there is a gradual rising of existence.But, Mahāmati, this gradual rising does not obtain except by reason of their attachment to the notion of self-nature.When the [ideas of] body, property, and abode are cherished in what is nothing but the manifestation of Mind itself, the external world is perceived under the aspects of individuality and generality, which, however, are not realities; and therefore, Mahāmati, neither a gradual nor a simultaneous rising of things is possible.It is only when the Vijñāna evolves by reason of discrimination which discriminates the manifestation of Mind itself [that existence is said to come into view].For this reason, Mahāmati, you must strive to get rid of notions of gradation and simultaneity in the combination of the causal activities.
Thus it is said: 140 Nothing whatever is born or ceases to exist by reason of causation; when causation is discriminated there is birth and cessation.
(85) 141 It is not to keep off the idea of birth and disappearance which takes place in causation; it is to keep off the wrong imagination as to causation, which is cherished by the ignorant.
142 The being and non-being of things subject to causation has no reality; the triple world owes its existence to the Mind put into confusion by reason of habit-energy.
143 Not ever being in existence, what things are there that are born? [but] in causation nothing is lost; when effect-producing objects (samskrita) are regarded as like unto a barren woman's child or a flower in the sky, one perceives that grasping (subject) and grasped (object) are an error and desists [from committing the same error].
144 There is nothing that is to be born, nor is there anything that has been born; even causation is not; it is because of wordly usage that things are talked of as existing.
XXXII At that moment again Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this to the Blessed One:Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the teaching known as the essence of discrimination as regards words, whereby, Blessed One, I and other Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas, comprehending and becoming well acquainted with the essence of discrimination as regards words, will be thoroughly informed of the signification of two things, expression and expressed, and, thereby immediately attaining supreme enlightenment, will explain the signification of these two things, expression and expressed, for the purification of all beings.Replied the Blessed One: Then, Mahāmati, listen well and reflect well, (86) for I will tell you about it.Well done! said Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva and listened to the Blessed One.The Blessed One said this to him: There are, Mahāmati, four kinds of word-discrimination.They are: (1) Words denoting individual marks, (2) dream-words, (3) words growing out of the attachment to erroneous speculations and discriminations, and (4) words growing out of the discrimination that knows no beginning.
Now, Mahāmati, the words denoting individual marks rise from discriminating forms and characteristic signs as real in themselves and becoming attached to them.The dream-words, Mahāmati, rise from the unreal surroundings which reveal themselves [before the mind] when it recollects its previous experience.The words growing out of the attachment to erroneous speculations and discriminations, Mahāmati, rise from recollecting deeds once previously committed.The words growing out of the discrimination that has been functioning since beginningless time, Mahāmati, rise from the habit-energy whose seeds have been growing out of the clinging to erroneous speculations and false imaginations since beginningless time.I say, Mahāmati, these are the four features of word-discrimination, which is the answer to your question.
XXXIII At that time again, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva requested of the Blessed One to speak on this subject:Pray tell me again, Blessed One, about the conditions whereby the word-discrimination manifests itself.Where, whence, how, and by whom do words indicating discrimination take place among the people?Said the Blessed One: Mahāmati, the word-discrimination goes on taking place by the coordination of the head, chest, nose, throat, palate, lips, tongue, and teeth.Said Mahāmati; Again, Blessed One, (87) are words to be considered different (anya) or not-different (ananya) from discrimination?Replied the Blessed One: Mahāmati, they are neither different nor not-different.Why? Because words rise, Mahāmati, with discrimination as their cause.If, Mahāmati, words are different from discrimination, they cannot have it for cause.Then if they are not different, words cannot express the sense, which they do.Therefore, words and discrimination are neither different nor not-different.
Then Mahāmati said: Again, Blessed One, are words themselves the highest reality? or is what is expressed in words the highest reality?The Blessed One replied: Mahāmati, words are not the highest reality, nor is what is expressed in words the highest reality.Why? Because the highest reality is an exalted state of bliss, and as it cannot be entered into by mere statements regarding it, words are not the highest reality.Mahāmati, the highest reality is to be attained by the inner realisation of noble wisdom; it is not a state of word-discrimination;therefore, discrimination does not express the highest reality.And then, Mahāmati, words are subject to birth and destruction; they are unsteady, mutually conditioning, and are produced by the law of causation.And again, Mahāmati, what is mutually conditioning and produced by the law of causation cannot express the highest reality, because the indications [pointing to the distinction between] self and not-self are non-existent.Mahāmati, words are these indications and do not express [the highest reality].
(88) Further, Mahāmati, word-discrimination cannot express the highest reality, for external objects with their multitudinous individual marks are non-existent, and only appear before us as something revealed out of Mind itself.Therefore, Mahāmati, you must try to keep yourself away from the various forms of word-discrimination.
XXXIV Thus it is said: 145 In all things there is no self-nature, words too are devoid of reality; as the ignorant understand not what is meant by emptiness, yes, by emptiness, they wander about.
146 In all things there is no self-nature, they are mere words of people; that which is discriminated has no reality; [even] Nirvāṇa is like a dream; nothing is seen to be in transmigration, nor does anything ever enter into Nirvāṇa.
147 As a king or a wealthy householder, giving his children various clay-made animals, pleases them and makes them play [with the toys], but later gives them real ones;
148 So, I, making use of various forms and images of things, instruct my sons; but the limit of reality (bhutakoti) can [only] be realised within oneself.
XXXV At that time Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva again (89) said this to the Blessed One:Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the attainment of self-realisation by noble wisdom, which does not belong to the path and the usage of the philosophers; which is devoid of [all such predicates as] being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, existence and non-existence, eternity and non-eternity;which has nothing to do with the false imagination, nor with individuality and generality; which manifests itself as the truth of highest reality;which, going up continuously by degrees the stages of purification, enters upon the stage of Tathāgatahood;which, because of the original vows unattended by any striving, will perform its works in infinite worlds like a gem reflecting a variety of colours; and which is manifested [when one perceives how] signs of individuation rise in all things as one realises the course and realm of what is seen of Mind itself,and thereby I and other Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas are enabled to survey things from the point of view which is not hampered by marks of individuality and generality nor by anything of the false imagination, and may quickly attain supreme enlightenment and enable all beings to achieve the perfection of all their virtues.
Replied the Blessed One: Well done, well done, Mahāmati! and again, well done, indeed, Mahāmati!Because of your compassion for the world, for the benefit of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the welfare, benefit, happiness of many people, both of celestial beings and humankind, Mahāmati, you present yourself before me and make this request.Therefore, Mahāmati, listen well and truly, and reflect, for I will tell you.Assuredly, said Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva, and gave ear to the Blessed One.(90) The Blessed One said this to him: Mahāmati, since the ignorant and the simple-minded, not knowing that the world is what is seen of Mind itself, cling to the multitudinousness of external objects, cling to the notions of being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, existence and non-existence, eternity and non-eternity, as being characterised by self-nature which rises from discrimination based on habit-energy, they are addicted to false imaginings.Mahāmati, it is like a mirage in which the springs are seen as if they were real. They are imagined so by the animals who, thirsty from the heat of the season, would run after them.Not knowing that the springs are their own mental hallucinations, the animals do not realise that there are no such springs.In the same way, Mahāmati, the ignorant and simple-minded with their minds impressed by various erroneous speculations and discriminations since beginningless time; with their minds burning with the fire of greed, anger, and folly; delighted in a world of multitudinous forms; with their thoughts saturated with the ideas of birth, destruction, and subsistence; not understanding well what is meant by existent and non-existent, by inner and outer;the ignorant and simple-minded fall into the way of grasping at oneness and otherness, being and non-being.Mahāmati, it is like the city of the Gandharvas which the unwitted take for a real city, though it is not so in fact.This city appears in essence owing to their attachment to the memory of a city preserved in seed from beginningless time.This city is thus neither existent nor non-existent.In the same way, Mahāmati, clinging to the memory (vasana) of erroneous speculations and doctrines since beginningless time, they hold fast to ideas such as oneness and otherness, being and non-being, and their thoughts are not at all clear about what is seen of Mind-only.(91) Mahāmati, it is like a man, who, dreaming in his sleep of a country variously filled with women, men, elephants, horses, cars, pedestrians, villages, towns, hamlets, cows, buffalos, mansions, woods, mountains, rivers, and lakes enters into its inner appartments and is awakened.While awakened thus, he recollects the city and its inner apartments.What do you think, Mahāmati? Is this person to be regarded as wise, who is recollecting the various unrealities he has seen in his dream? Said Mahāmati: Indeed, he is not, Blessed One.The Blessed One continued: In the same way the ignorant and simple-minded who are bitten by erroneous views and are inclined toward the philosophers, do not recognise that things seen of the Mind itself are like a dream, and are held fast by the notions of oneness and otherness, of being and non-being.Mahāmati, it is like the painter's canvas on which there is no depression nor elevation as imagined by the ignorant.In the same way, Mahāmati, there may be in the future some people brought up in the habit-energy, mentality, and imagination based on the philosophers' erroneous views;clinging to the ideas of oneness and otherness, of bothness and not-bothness, they may bring themselves and others to ruin; they may declare those people nihilists who hold the doctrine of no-birth apart from the alternatives of being and non-being.They [argue against] cause and effect, they are followers of the wicked views whereby they uproot meritorious causes of unstained purity.They are to be kept far away by those whose desires are for things excellent.They are those whose thoughts are entangled in the errors of self, other, and both, (92) in the errors of imagining being and non-being, assertion and refutation, and hell will be their final refuge.Mahāmati, it is like the dim-eyed ones who, seeing a hair-net, would exclaim to one another, saying: “It is wonderful! it is wonderful! Look, O honourable sirs!"And the said hair-net has never been brought into existence. It is in fact neither an entity nor a non-entity, because it is seen and not seen.In the same manner, Mahāmati, those whose minds are addicted to discrimination of the erroneous views as cherished by the philosophers, and who are also given up to the realistic ideas of being and non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness, will contradict the good Dharma, ending in the destruction of themselves and others.Mahāmati, it is like a firebrand-wheel which is no real wheel but which is imagined to be of such character by the ignorant, but not by the wise......
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
[CHAPTER FIVE]
LXXXI (217) At that time again, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this to the Blessed One:Is the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Fully-Enlightened One, permanent or impermanent?Said the Blessed One: Mahāmati, the Tathāgata is neither permanent nor impermanent.Why? Because either way there is a fault connected with it.Mahāmati, what fault is connected with either assertion?1If the Tathāgata is permanent, he will be connected with the creating agencies.For, Mahāmati, according to all the philosophers the creating agencies are something uncreated and permanent.But the Tathāgata is not permanent [in the same sense] as the uncreated are permanent.If he is impermanent, he will be connected with things created.Because the Skandhas which are predicable as qualified and qualifying are nonexistent, and because the Skandhas are subject to annihilation, destructibility is their nature.Mahāmati, all that is created is impermanent as is a jug, a garment, straw, a piece of wood, a brick, etc., which are all connected with impermanency.Thus all the preparations for the knowledge of the All-Knowing One will become useless as they are things created.On account of no distinction being made, the Tathāgata, indeed, would be something created.For this reason, the Tathāgata is neither permanent nor impermanent.
Again, Mahāmati, the Tathāgata is not permanentfor the reason that [if he were] he would be like space, and the preparations one makes for Tathāgatahood would be useless.That is to say, Mahāmati, space is neither permanent nor impermanent as it excludes [the idea of] permanence and impermanence, (218) and it is improper to speak of it as characterised with the faults of oneness and otherness, of bothness and not-bothness, of permanence and impermanence.
Further, Mahāmati, it is like the horns of a hare, or a horse, or an ass, or a camel, or a frog, or a snake, or a fly, or a fish; [with the Tathāgata] as with them here is the permanency of no-birth.Because of this fault of the permanency of no-birth, the Tathāgata cannot be permanent.
However, Mahāmati, there is another sense in which the Tathāgata can be said to be permanent.How? Because the knowledge arising from the attainment of enlightenment [ = an intuitive understanding] is of a permanent nature, the Tathāgata is permanent.Mahāmati, this knowledge, as it is attained intuitively by the Tathāgatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, is, indeed, permanent.Whether the Tathāgatas are born or not, this Dharmatā, which is the regulative and sustaining principle to be discoverable in the enlightenment of all the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, abides,and this sustaining principle of existence is not like the emptiness of space, which, however, is not understood by the ignorant and simple-minded.Mahāmati, this knowledge of enlightenment belonging to the Tathāgatas comes forth from transcendental knowledge (prajnajñāna);Mahāmati, the Tathāgatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones do not come forth from the habit-energy of ignorance which is concerned with the Citta, Manas, and Manovijñāna, and the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas.The triple world originates from the discriminating of unrealities, but the Tathāgatas do not originate from the discriminating of unrealities.Where duality obtains, Mahāmati, there is permanency and impermanency because of its not being one.Mahāmati, [the truth of] absolute solitude is, indeed, non-dualistic2 because all things are characterised with non-duality and no-birth.For this reason, Mahāmati, the Tathāgatas, Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones are neither permanent nor impermanent.Mahāmati, as long as there is word-discrimination, (219) there follows the faulty notion of permanency and impermanency.The destruction of the notion of permanency and impermanency as held by the ignorant, Mahāmati, comes from the getting rid of the knowledge that is based on discrimination, and not from the getting rid of the knowledge that is based on the insight of solitude.
So it is said:
1 By keeping away permanency and impermanency, [and yet] by keeping permanency and impermanency in sight, those who always see the Buddhas will not expose themselves to the power of the philosophical doctrines.
2 When permanency and impermanency are adhered to all the accumulation [one makes for the attainment of reality] will be of no avail; by destroying the knowledge that is based on discrimination, [the idea of] permanency and impermanency is kept back.
3 As soon as an assertion is made, all is in confusion; when it is understood that there is nothing in the world but what is seen of the Mind itself, disputes never arise.
Here Ends the Fifth Chapter, “On the Deduction of the Permanency and Impermanency of Tathāgatahood.”
[CHAPTER SIX]
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------